

===== PAGE 1 =====

Liquidity and Market Structure: Discussion
STOR O
David K. Whitcomb
The Journal of Finance, Vol. 43, No. 3, Papers and Proceedings of the Forty-Seventh
Annual Meeting of the American Finance Association, Chicago, Illinois, December
28-30, 1987 (Jul., 1988), 634-637.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-1082%28198807%2943%3A3%3C634%3ALAMSD%3E2.0.CO%3B2-N
The Journal of Finance is currently published by American Finance Association.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of ISTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. ISTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you
have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and
you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/afina.html.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or
printed page of such transmission.
JSTOR is an independent not-for-profit organization dedicated to creating and preserving a digital archive of
scholarly journals. For more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org/
Fri Feb 11 10:05:46 2005

===== PAGE 2 =====

634
The Journal of Finance
DISCUSSION
DAVID K. WHITCOMB*: It is a privilege to be asked to discuss any paper by
Miller and Grossman. It also represents a coming of age for market microstructure
that such eminent mainstream financial economists should be contributing to it.
Like at least half of the significant theoretical papers in microstructure, the
Grossman and Miller paper seeks to model the activities of market makers. The
authors' interest is in liquidity, but they rightly point out that we can't understand
liquidity, much less measure it, until we have a better understanding of market
making, which is the sale of liquidity.
If there have been so many papers on market making, why don't we understand
it better? One reason may be that there are so many competing models with no
attempt so far at a general synthesis. One set of papers (including Stoll (14], Ho
and Stoll [9, 10, 11], Amihud and Mendelson [11, and Mildenstein and Schleef
(12])' models the pricing and inventory behavior of risk-averse dealers, usually
assuming either monopolistic dealers or ignoring the interactions among dealers'
quotes. A second set of models (including Bagehöt [2], Copeland and Galai [5]
and Glosten and Milgrom (6]) allows for risk-neutral dealers who charge a price
for liquidity to compensate for losses to traders possessing superior information
whose activities are camouflaged by "noise traders"? A third model (Cohen,
Maier, Schwartz, and Whitcomb, hereinafter CMSW, (3]) treats the price of
liquidity as a natural property of markets- even markets without dealers. Trans-
action costs and a finite number of investors keep price generation from behaving
as a continuous-time Weiner process, and the "gravitational pull" of counterpart
limit orders results in a positive price of liquidity.
Although Grossman and Miller do not seek "
... to expand [the] ... class of
inventory models," their model shares the risk-averse market-maker assumption
with "inventory models". This leads to some disturbing implications. By equation
(15), we have that the expected return of market makers would be zero if "a",
the risk-aversion parameter, were zero. This is not a problem in a timeless
framework like Grossman and Miller's, except that it implies that market making
will be dominated by the least risk-averse individuals. Indeed, it would require
some agency-theoretic handwaving to avoid the implication that market making
would be the province of corporations in equilibrium and that it would therefore
be free. Further, because the Grossman and Miller model does not explore the
interactions among market makers in price setting, it does not make it possible
to see what would happen to price if market makers did not all have the same
risk-aversion parameter. Among all the risk-aversion models of market making,
only Ho and Stoll [9, 11], adopting the CMSW model of interaction, explore the
effect of differing market-maker prices.
One of the subtle consequences of a model that does not consider pricing
interactions among traders is that it leads to policy conclusions such as that"...
* Rutgers University.
^ Mildensteen and Schleef [12] do not explicitly assume risk aversion, but their Assumptions D.2:
(b) and D.3 imply risk aversion.
2 Grossman and Stiglitz (7] first modeled the activities of noise traders and information traders,
though their focus is on market efficiency rather than market making.
3 See, for example, Stoll [14], footnote 3.

===== PAGE 3 =====

Discussion
635
in highly active markets ... where many separate buy and sell orders are entering
the trading pit virtually simultaneously.... it might seem that quoted bid-ask
spreads and market-makers' profits ... would be driven towards zero by the
competitive entry of new market makers. The market, of course, would then
collapse..." The use of the subjunctive made me believe that Grossman and
Miller were going to refute this conclusion. However, they then went on to say
"To keep markets viable, therefore, exchanges limit the number of 'seats' avail-
able to market makers.... Exchanges also typically define a minimum price-
unit (called a 'tick') which, in highly active markets, serves also to set a minimum
on the quoted bid-ask spread and the profits a 'scalper' makes from a quick
turnaround." I must say I am shocked to hear from a Chicago Professor and a
Chicago Ph.D. that unrestrained competition is a threat to the viability of the
Fortunately, this is not so; CMSW [3] show, in a model where there is no
minimum "tick" size, that free entry and exit of market makers does not detract
from market "viability". Indeed, formal market makers are not needed at all for
market viability; individuals provide liquidity to each other when some choose to
(and are allowed to) trade via limit order. If "outside customers" do not post
enough limit orders, market makers will come into existence to sell liquidity. The
CMSW model does show that as the flow of orders increases without bound, the
spread goes to zero, but that is a cause for rejoicing, not a cause for alarm.*
Grossman and Miller defer until after their formal model any mention of the
bid-ask spread, because they feel, quite correctly, that the spread is an inappro-
priate measure of market liquidity. However, the spread is the eminence gris of
their model. In drawing empirical implications from their model, Grossman and
Miller focus on serial correlation. Their equation (24) gives the initially surprising
implication that price changes will exhibit negative serial correlation in a world
with market makers and that, ceteris paribus, assets with higher variability of
expected price changes will have higher negative serial correlation.
This implication becomes less surprising when it is realized that it would
appear to be built in. First, the authors assume that positive immediacy demand
of outside customers at time 1 is exactly offset by new customers with the
opposite imbalance at time 2. This enables market makers to buy low (at time 1)
and sell high (at time 2), giving them market-making profits and creating the
appearance of negative serial correlation of price changes. What we really have
is just the well-known bouncing of the transaction price back and forth between
the bid and the ask, except that, in the Grossman and Miller model, the bid-ask
spread is "in the closet".
Negative serial correlation observed in tick-to-tick price change data is purely
an artifact of two things: (1) the way we conventionally measure price changes
and (2) the minimum "tick" sizes Grossman and Miller appear to favor. There
* Clearly, with the large fixed costs of market making posited by Grossman and Miller, the number
of traders willing to "make markets" would be limited. Given 1988 technology, however, it is mainly
institutional impediments to public limit-order trading in futures exchanges and the OTC market
that inhibit competition in market making. See Schwartz and Whitcomb [13] on the role of
institutional investors using automated trading systems in providing competition to conventional
market makers in equities.
5 A formal model is given in CMSW [4], Chapter 6. See especially the discussion following
Proposition 1.

===== PAGE 4 =====

636
The Journal of Finance
is no way a trader, however low his or her transaction costs, can profit from the
apparent future price predictions. It we could measure price changes from bid
price to bid price (or from ask price to ask price) and eliminate or control for the
price-rounding effect of minimum "tick" sizes, this artifactual negative serial
correlation would be eliminated.
Greater price variance will be empirically associated with greater negative
serial correlation of returns as Grossman and Miller predict, but for a different
reason. Higher variance is associated with higher spreads in both the "inventory"
models and the adverse-selection models; and a greater spread means greater
artifactual negative serial correlation.
Despite my carping comments, which are exactly what you would expect from
a competing market maker in the market-microstructure literature, I welcome
the Grossman and Miller model of market making. It is time the big guns of
finance were brought to bear on the question of liquidity and on the implications
of the demand for liquidity on the relevance of the way we conventionally measure
returns. The proliferation of models of market making and the failure of any one
model to completely capture all the determinants of the price of liquidity also
mandate that we turn our efforts toward a synthesis of the models of market
making.
prices and bid-ask prices are disseminated; but owing to the "crowd" or "open outery" nature of
* A test of this prediction is possible in equities markets or options markets, where both transaction
trading in futures markets (where no limit order "book" is maintained and bilateral trades occur
nearly continuously), only transaction prices are observed in commodities and futures markets.
Empirical evidence in support of this prediction is given by Hasbrouck and Ho [8], who find that
common stock tick-to-tick transaction-price returns are negatively serially correlated, whereas
quotation-price returns have much smaller negative correlation on average and the 75th percentile
shows positive correlation.
REFERENCES
1. Y. Amihud and H. Mendelson. "Dealership Markets: Market-Making With Inventory." Journal
of Financial Economics 8 (1980), 31-53.
2. W. Bagehot. "The Only Game in Town," Financial Analysts' Journal 27 (1971), 12-14, 22.
3. K. J. Cohen, S. F. Maier, R. A. Schwartz and D. K. Whitcomb. "Transaction Costs, Order
Placement Strategy, and the Existence of the Bid-Ask Spread." Journal of Political Economy
89 (April 1981), 287-305.
5. T. Cope and MidD. Cuture of Securitien Warket New ork: Prestige Hal, 198a of Finance 38
(1983), 1457-69.
6. L. Glosten and P. Milgrom. "Bid, Ask and Transaction Prices in a Specialist Market With
Heterogeneously Informed Traders." Journal of Financial Economics 14 (March 1985), 71-100.
7. S. Grossman and J. Stiglitz. "On the Impossibility of Informationally Efficient Markets."
American Economic Review 70 (1980), 393-407.
8. J. Hasbrouck and T. Ho. "Order Arrival, Quote Behavior, and the Return-Generating Process."
Journal of Finance 42 (1987), 1035-48.
9. T. Ho and H. R. Stoll. "On Dealer Markets Under Competition." Journal of Finance 35 (1980),
259-67.
10. —
-. "Optimal Dealer Pricing Under Transactions and Return Uncertainty." Journal of
Financial Economics 9 (1981), 47-73.
11. -
- "The Dynamics of Dealer Markets Under Competition." Journal of Finance 38 (1983),
1053-74.

===== PAGE 5 =====

Discussion
637
12. E. Mildenstein and H. J. Schleef. "The Optimal Pricing Policy of a Monopolistic Marketmaker
in the Equity Market." Journal of Finance 38 (1983), 218-31.
13. R. A. Schwartz and D. K. Whitcomb. Transaction Costs and Institutional Investor Trading
Strategies. New York: Salomon Brothers Center for the Study of Financial Institutions
Monograph Series, forthcoming, 1988.
14. H. R. Stoll. "The Supply of Dealer Services in Security Markets." Journal of Finance 33 (1978),