

===== PAGE 1 =====

Journal of Finance forthcoming 
 
 
Time Variation in Liquidity:  The Role of Market Maker 
Inventories and Revenues 
 
 
Carole Comerton-Forde 
Terrence Hendershott 
Charles M. Jones 
Pamela C. Moulton 
Mark S. Seasholes * 
 
 
 
Abstract 
 
 
We show that market-maker balance sheet and income statement variables explain time 
variation in liquidity, suggesting liquidity-s upplier financing constraints matter.  Using 
11 years of NYSE specialist inventory positi ons and trading revenues, we find that 
aggregate market level and specialist-firm level spreads widen when specialists have 
large positions or lose money. The effects are non-linear and most prominent when 
inventories are big or trading results have been particularly poor.  These sensitivities are 
smaller after specialist firm mergers, cons istent with deep pockets easing financing 
constraints.  Finally, compared to low-volatility stocks, the liquidity of high-volatility 
stocks is more sensitive to inventories and losses.
 
 
 
                                                           
* Comerton-Forde is at University of Sydney (C.Comerton-Forde@econ.usyd.edu.au); Hendershott is at Haas 
School of Business, University of California, Berkeley (hender@haas.berkeley.edu); Jones is at Columbia 
Business School (cj88@columbia.edu); Moulton is  at Fordham Graduate School of Business 
(pmoulton@fordham.edu); and Seasholes is at Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Mark. 
Seasholes@emailias.com).  We thank the NYSE for providing data. We thank Cam Harvey, an associated editor, 
two anonymous referees, Yakov Amihud, Jeff Benton, Ekke hart Boehmer, Robin Greenwood, Joel Hasbrouck, 
Jerry Liu, Marios Panayides, Lubos Pastor, Avanidha r Subrahmanyam, Dimitri Vayanos, Vish Viswanathan, 
Masahiro Watanabe, Pierre-Olivier Weill, and participants at the NBER Market Microstructure meeting, the 
Trading Frictions in Asset Markets conference at UCSB, the 2008 AFA meeting, Columbia University, the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, University of Maryland, University of Michigan, Office of Economic 
Analysis of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, Society of Quantitative Analysts, University of 
Amsterdam, University of California Sa nta Barbara, University of Toronto, University of Utah, and University 
of Washington for helpful comments. Hendershott grat efully acknowledges support from the National Science 
Foundation. Part of this research was conducted wh ile Moulton was an economist and Comerton-Forde and 
Hendershott were visiting economists at the New York Stock Exchange. This paper combines two working 
papers by subsets of the authors: “Market Maker I nventories and Liquidity” and “Market Maker Revenues and 
Stock Market Liquidity.” 

===== PAGE 2 =====

 
1 
Asset market liquidity varies considerably over time.  This variation matters to market 
participants who worry about the cost of trading into or out of a desired position in a short period 
of time.  Liquidity can affect asset prices, t oo.  For example, investors may demand higher rates 
of return as compensation for holding illiquid assets and assets that are particularly sensitive to 
fluctuations in liquidity.  Despite the interest in  aggregate liquidity from both of these angles, we 
know relatively little about exactly why market li quidity varies over time.  Recent theoretical 
work by Gromb and Vayanos (2002) and Brunne rmeier and Pedersen (2007), among others, 
postulates that limited market-maker capital can explain empirical features of asset market 
liquidity.  Up to now, data limitations have hamper ed efforts to test the broad implications of 
these models and demonstrate direct links between liquidity supplier behavior, capital 
limitations, and liquidity. 
In this paper, we provide the first direct evid ence that shocks to market-maker balance sheet 
and income statement variables impact daily stock market liquidity.  Using an 11–year (1994-
2004) panel of daily New York Stock Exchange  (NYSE) specialist inventory positions and 
trading revenues, we show that after specialis ts lose money on their inventories and/or find 
themselves holding large positions, effective sp reads widen.  Our results hold even after 
controlling for stock returns and volatility, and they  hold at both the aggregate market level and 
the specialist-firm level. 
How are our findings consistent with the presence of market-maker financing constraints?  In 
the short run at least, specialists and other mark et makers have limited capital.  Lenders typically 
impose limits on leverage ratios (or equivalently fix required margins).
1  Information 
                                                           
1  During our sample period, there are three distinct ty pes of specialist firms in terms of access to capital.  
Specialist firms that are part of a much larger firm (such as Goldman, Fleet, Bear, or Merrill) deal with the 
parent in obtaining capital.  Most free-standing specialist firms clear through other member firms and so deal 

===== PAGE 3 =====

 
2 
asymmetries can make it hard to raise capital quickly or cheaply.  This means that market makers 
face short-run limits on the amount of risk they can bear.  As their inventory positions grow 
larger (in either direction, long or  short), market makers become increasingly hesitant to take on 
more inventory, and may quote smaller quantities at less attractive prices.  Similarly, losses from 
trading reduce market makers’ equity capital.  If  leverage ratios remain relatively constant, as 
suggested by the evidence in Adrian and Shin (2007), market makers’ position limits decrease 
proportionately, which should similarly reduce market makers’ willingness to provide liquidity. 
Our general empirical approach is to pred ict today’s liquidity (spreads) using lagged 
specialist inventories and trading revenues.  Becau se of their structural advantages, specialists 
usually earn positive trading revenue on short- term (intraday) roundtrip transactions,
2 but are 
more exposed to the possibility of losses on inventories held for longer periods (overnight or 
longer).  When we decompose trading revenues into intraday versus longer-horizon components, 
we find that revenues associated with inventorie s held through at least one overnight period are 
indeed the ones that are associated with future  liquidity.  This overnight breakpoint dovetails 
nicely with our story, because anecdotal evidence indicates that lenders and risk managers are 
most likely to evaluate financing terms a nd position limits based on daily profit and loss 
statements and end-of-day balance sheets. 
Our analysis is carried out at two levels of  aggregation.  We begin the paper by measuring 
inventories, revenues, and liquidity at the mark et level.  However, financing constraints are 
likely to operate at the specialist-firm level, b ecause it is the specialist firm that must obtain 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
with capital requirements imposed by these other firms.  Only a few specialist firms self-clear; these firms deal 
directly with external lenders.   
2  During our sample period, an NYSE specialist generally has considerable information about liquidity supply and 
demand.  Floor brokers routinely share information with the specialist about their trading interests.  The 
specialist continually observes electronic orders in the limit order book.  Finally, subject to NYSE rules, the 
specialist has a last-mover advantage in deciding whether or not to participate in a given trade. 

===== PAGE 4 =====

 
3 
capital from lenders or investors.  Therefore, mu ch of the analysis in this paper is undertaken 
using a panel of specialist-firm inventories, revenues, and liquidity measures. 
At the market level, specialist inventories a nd trading revenues vary considerably over time, 
so there is ample scope for shocks in these variab les to force contractions in liquidity provision.  
Aggregate specialist inventories have a standa rd deviation of roughly $100 million per day.  We 
find that larger (absolute) inve ntory positions predict lower future liquidity.  Specialists in 
aggregate lose money on about 10% of the tradi ng days during our sample.  The average loss is 
about $4 million on these days, and losses tend to cluster together in time.  We find that revenues 
associated with inventories held overnight for ecast future liquidity.  As predicted by financing 
constraint models, the effects of inventories a nd revenues on liquidity are nonlinear.  Effects are 
greatest when inventories are biggest and/or revenues are lowest. 
At the specialist-firm level, inventories and revenues have similarly strong effects on future 
liquidity.  If financing constraints operate at this  level, we expect to find two sets of results.  
First, there should be a common component in liqui dity for all stocks assigned to a particular 
specialist firm.  Second, a specialist firm’s inventories and revenues should affect liquidity in its 
assigned stocks.  Coughenour and Saad (2004) demonstrate the former; we show the latter result.  
As with the aggregate results, the inventory and revenue effects are greatest when a given firm’s 
inventories are highest and/or its revenues are lowest. 
To complement the time-series evidence, we ne xt identify a set of market makers who are a 
priori more likely to face financial constraints.  In particular, we examine specialist firms 
identified by Coughenour and Deli (2002) where the specialists themselves supply the equity 
capital.  These specialist-owned firms likely face tighter financing constraints than corporate-

===== PAGE 5 =====

 
4 
owned specialist firms, and we show that the li quidity of stocks assigned to specialist-owned 
firms is more sensitive to inventories and trading losses. 
During our sample period, all of the specia list-owned firms in the Coughenour and Deli 
(2002) sample merge with larger, corporate-owne d firms.  These mergers provide a potentially 
exogenous, positive shock to capital availability.  Wh en we follow the stocks assigned to a given 
specialist-owned firm, we find that liquidity in these stocks becomes somewhat less sensitive to 
specialist inventories and revenues after the merger .  Our finding is consistent with deep pockets 
easing financing constraints. 
We end by studying time variation of liquidity fo r different types of stocks.  Brunnermeier 
and Pedersen (2007) construct a theoretical model showing that limited risk-bearing capacity can 
have a differential impact on high- and low-funda mental-volatility stocks.  They use the term 
“flight to quality” to refer to the result that the liquidity differential between high- and low-
volatility securities is bigger when market makers have taken on larger positions or when market 
maker wealth decreases.  Flight to quality evidence is also present in Pastor and 
Stambaugh (2003).  We test the Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2007) predictions by examining the 
relation between inventories, trading revenues,  and the liquidity of high- and low-volatility 
stocks.  Supporting the theoretical prediction, th e liquidity of high-volatility stocks is more 
sensitive to larger inventories and losses than is the liquidity of low-volatility stocks. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as fo llows.  Section I reviews related literature, and 
Section II provides a general description of the data.  Section III shows the basic relations 
between aggregate market-maker inventories, revenues, and market liquidity. Section IV 
continues the analysis at the specialist-firm leve l.  Sections V and VI study a set of specialist-
owned firms where we a priori expect financing constraints to be tighter.  We conduct a cross-

===== PAGE 6 =====

 
5 
sectional analysis and an event-study/merger analysis on these specialist-owned firms.  
Section VII investigates whether market makers de monstrate a flight to quality in their liquidity 
provision, and Section VIII concludes. 
I.  Related Literature 
Most models of liquidity focus on three sources  of frictions:  fixed costs, inventory, and 
asymmetric information.  Kyle (1985) and Glos ton and Milgrom (1985) examine the impact of 
private information on trading costs.  St oll (1978), Amihud and Mendelson (1980), Ho and 
Stoll (1981, 1983), Mildenstein and Schleef (1983) , and Grossman and Miller (1988) examine 
the impact of inventories.  Inventory models without capital constraints generally predict that 
liquidity (the width of the bid-ask spread) is  not affected by the market maker’s inventory 
position, but there are exceptions.  For example, spreads vary positively with the amount of 
inventory exposure in the linear demand and supply case of Amihud and Mendelson (1980) and 
in Shen and Starr (2002) when a market maker faces quadratic costs.  O’Hara and Oldfield 
(1986) show that spreads depend on inventories if market makers are risk-averse.  To the extent 
that financing constraints can give  rise to risk-averse behavior by market makers, this last model 
can provide an alternative backdrop for the empirical work in this paper.  
Even models that do not predict a link between inventories and the width of the spread can 
generate time variation in liquidity, as a market maker’s desire to supply liquidity is typically a 
function of an asset’s fundament al volatility.  Time variation in volatility would lead to time 
variation in spreads.  To account for such a possibility, we control for conditional volatility in 
our empirical work. 
 
Theory focusing on funding costs and financi ng constraints is more recent. Kyle and 
Xiong (2001) show that the presence of convergen ce traders (arbitrageurs) with decreasing risk 

===== PAGE 7 =====

 
6 
aversion leads to correlated liquidations and high volatility.  Gromb and Vayanos (2002) study a 
model in which arbitrageurs face margin constr aints and show how the arbitrageurs’ liquidity 
provision benefits all investors. 3  However, because the arbitrag eurs cannot capture all of the 
benefits, they fail to take the socially optim al level of risk.  Weill (2007) examines dynamic 
liquidity provision by market makers.  He shows th at if market makers have access to sufficient 
capital, they provide the socially optimal amount of  liquidity, but if capital is insufficient or too 
costly, then market makers undersupply liquidit y.  Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2007) construct 
a model — along the lines of Grossman and Mille r (1988) — that also links market makers’ 
funding and market liquidity.  The undersupply of liquidity is more severe if market makers face 
predation — see Attari, Mello, and Ruckes (2005) and Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2005). 
Empirically, Chordia, Roll, and Subrahma nyam (2000), Hasbrouck and Seppi (2001), and 
Huberman and Halka (2001) examine the common component in liquidity changes across stocks.  
Coughenour and Saad (2004) show that co-moveme nt in liquidity is stronger among stocks 
traded by the same NYSE specialist firm. Chor dia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2001), Chordia, 
Sarkar, and Subrahmanyam (2005), and Hamee d, Kang, and Viswanathan (2006) find that 
aggregate stock market liquidity is worse follo wing a stock market decline.  We find that 
specialists are net long over 94 percent of the time, so a stock market decline is likely to reduce 
overall specialist capital, and this can directly explain the reduction in liquidity.  Along similar 
lines, Mitchell, Pedersen, and Pulvino (2007) show  that a loss of capital suffered by convertible 
and merger arbitrageurs can have strong, long-lasting effects on related asset prices. 
Both liquidity supplier wealth (revenues) a nd the amount of capital committed by liquidity 
suppliers (inventories) play significant roles in the theoretical work on capital constraints and 
                                                           
3 Yuan (2005) provides a model which shows a link between information asymmetry and liquidity when informed 
investors are constrained. 

===== PAGE 8 =====

 
7 
liquidity.4  Prior data on market-maker inventories and trading typically cover relatively short 
periods of time and/or a limited number of securities. 5  While these limitations precluded testing 
for the relation between aggregate liquidity and limited market maker risk-bearing capacity at 
interday horizons, the microstructure literature ha s been successful in showing that inventories 
play an important role in intraday trading and price formation. 6  For example, Madhavan and 
Smidt (1993), Hansch, Naik, and Viswanathan ( 1998), Reiss and Werner (1998), and Naik and 
Yadav (2003a) all find support for market makers ’ controlling risk by mean reverting their 
inventory positions towards target levels. Hans ch, Naik, and Viswanatha n (1998) and Reiss and 
Werner (1998) show that differences in inve ntory positions across dealers determine which 
dealers offer the best prices and when dealers trade.  
Finally, a number of papers examine the profitability of specialists. 7  Sofianos (1995) 
provides some descriptive statistics on speci alist trading revenues, and Hasbrouck and 
Sofianos (1993) decompose specialist profits by trading horizon and find that most profits accrue 
from high frequency (short-term) trading stra tegies.  Coughenour and Harris (2004) extend the 
results to show that the 2001 reduction in the minimum tick size impacts specialist profits.  
Panayides (2007) analyzes how specialists’ trad ing, inventory, and profitability depend on their 
obligations under NYSE rules. 
                                                           
4 Naik and Yadav (2003b) show that the contemporane ous relationship between government bond price changes 
and changes in market-maker inventories differs when mark et-maker inventories are very long or very short, but 
they do not directly examine liquidity. 
5 For examples using NYSE specialist data see Hasbr ouck and Sofianos (1993), Madhavan and Smidt (1993), and 
Madhavan and Sofianos (1998). For examples using L ondon Stock Exchange market-maker data see Hansch, 
Naik, and Viswanathan (1998), Reiss and Werner (1998), a nd Naik and Yadav (2003a). For futures markets data 
see Manaster and Mann  (1996). For options market da ta see Garleanu, Pedersen, and Poteshman (2005). For 
foreign exchange data see Lyons (2001) and Cao, Evans, and Lyons (2006).  
6  Kavajecz and Odders-White (2001) is an exception. On a trade-by-trade basis they find no evidence that 
specialists revise the inside quote in response to changes in inventory. 
7 Market-maker profits have also been examined in other markets.  For example, Hansch, Naik, and 
Viswanathan (1999) examine how London Stock Exchange market-maker trading profits vary depending on 
whether the trade is preferenced or internalized.
 

===== PAGE 9 =====

 
8 
II.  Data and Descriptive Statistics 
Data on specialist trading revenues and invent ories are from the NYSE’s Specialist Equity 
Trade Summary (SPETS).  As its name suggests,  SPETS provides a daily summary of specialist 
activity.  For each stock, the file records the daily specialist purchases in dollars and shares, daily 
specialist sales in dollars and shares, and ope ning and closing specialist inventory positions. 
SPETS data are also employed by Madhavan and Sofianos (1998) and Hendershott and 
Seasholes (2007).  Liquidity measures are cal culated using NYSE Trades and Quotes (TAQ) 
data, while daily stock returns are from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). 
We measure economic quantities and conduct empi rical work at two different levels of 
aggregation:  market level and specialist-firm le vel.  Daily market-level time series start in 1994, 
end in 2004, and are denoted with the subscript “ m”.  Analysis at the specialist-firm level is 
conducted using an unbalanced data panel denoted with the subscript “ f”.  The panel is 
unbalanced because there is substantial consolidation among specialist firms over our 11-year 
sample period.  There are 41 specialist firms in  1994, but only seven firms at the end of our 
sample.
8  Our analysis focuses on the 37 specialist firms that have at least 750 days of trading 
data (about three years).  Each day we update  the set of common stocks assigned to each 
specialist firm.  The resulting panel incorporates 96.7% of the stock-day observations used in the 
aggregate (market-level) analysis.  
Liquidity:  What is the most appropriate measure of liquidity to use?  Brunnermeier and 
Pedersen (2007) define market liquidity as  the difference between the market-clearing 
transaction price and the fundamental value.  Si nce the single Walrasian auction in their paper 
                                                           
8  See Hatch and Johnson (2002) for a disc ussion of specialist firm consolidation.   See Corwin (2004) for a 
discussion of the allocation of stocks to specialist firms. 

===== PAGE 10 =====

 
9 
does not describe the actual continuous process of trading securities, no empirical measure of 
liquidity will match up perfectly with the model.   However, effective spreads are designed to 
measure the difference between the transaction pr ice and the fundamental value at a given time, 
so we use them throughout the paper as our proxy for liquidity. 
The effective spread is the difference between an estimate of a security’s true value (the 
midpoint of the bid and ask quotes) and the actual transaction price.  The wider the effective 
spread, the less liquid is the stock.  We use eff ective spreads rather than quoted spreads because 
specialists and floor brokers are sometimes willing to trade at prices within quoted bid and ask 
prices.       
Percentage effective spreads for stock j at time k on day t are defined respectively as:9 
 ES(%)j,k,t = 2  Ij,k,t (Pj,k,t – Mj,k,t) / Mj,k,t  
where Ij,k,t = 1 for buyer-initiated trades and Ij,k,t = –1 for seller-initiated trades, Pj,k,t is the trade 
price, and Mj,k,t is the corresponding quote midpoint.  We sign trades using Lee and 
Ready (1991) and use quotes from five seconds  prior to a trade for data up through 1998.  
After 1998, we use contemporaneous quotes to sign trades—see Bessembinder (2003).  We use 
share volume weights to calculate a stock’s daily average effective spreads ES(%)j,t.  To 
calculate ES(%)m,t, the market-level effective spreads on date t, we average cross-sectionally 
using market capitalization weights lagged by six days so that recent returns are not 
mechanically linked to the aggregate spread meas ures.  Specialist-firm level effective spreads 
ES(%)f,t  are calculated similarly for all common stocks assigned to that specialist firm. 
[ Insert Figure 1 Here ] 
                                                           
9  Results for spreads measured in dollars can be found in the Internet Appendix available at 
http://www.afajof.org/supplements.asp. 

===== PAGE 11 =====

 
10 
Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2001) , Jones (2006), and Hameed, Kang, and 
Viswanathan (2006) document a downward trend in average effective spreads over much of our 
sample period.  Figure 1 highlights the narrowing trend along with two sharp declines due to 
reductions in minimum tick sizes.  The firs t reduction was from eighths to sixteenths on 
June 24, 1997.  The second was from sixteenths to  pennies on January 29, 2001.  To account for 
these trends, we define the percentage effective spread measure Spr(%)t as the effective spread 
on day t relative to its average value in the recent past (subscripts “m” and “f” suppressed):  
 Spr(%) t  =  ES(%)t –  ∑
=
−
10
6
(%)5
1
j
jtES . (2) 
Lags 6 through 10 are used because many of our sp ecifications predict future effective spreads 
using specialist revenues, inventories, and return s at lags 1 through 5 as explanatory variables, 
and we want to ensure that the effective spr ead measure is not affected by contemporaneous 
correlation with potential right-hand side variables.  
Specialist Trading Revenues:   For each stock i on each day t, we calculate specialist gross 
trading revenues as in Sofianos (1995) by marki ng to market the specialist’s starting and ending 
inventories and adding the gross profits due to buying and selling during the day. 10  W e  th e n  
decompose specialist gross trading revenues in to intraday and longer-horizon components, 
depending on how long a position is  held.  The longer-horizon component, referred to as 
revenues from overnight inventories, are the trad ing revenues associated with inventories held 
through at least one overnight period.  These ar e defined as the mark-to-market profit/loss on 
inventory held at the end of day t-1 plus the mark-to-market profit/loss on the net change in 
                                                           
10 We use the terminology of Sofianos  (1995), who follows generally accepted accounting principles in referring to 
this daily measure as gross trading revenues.  So fianos and Hasbrouck (1993)  and Coughenour and Harris 
(2004) refer to the same quantity as gross trading profits. 

===== PAGE 12 =====

 
11 
inventory from the end of day t-1 to the end of day t.  Note that the revenues from overnight 
inventories depend both on the overnight stock re turn and on price changes during the trading 
day.  The second (shorter-horizon) component captu res intraday profits and losses and consists 
of the trading revenues earned on all round-trip tr ansactions where both legs (the purchase and 
the sale) occur on day t.  Please see Appendix A for details  related to the decomposition of 
specialist revenues. 
Specialist revenues are aggregated each day at the market level or for each specialist firm 
before being demeaned.  There are four regime s for demeaning, since specialist participation 
rates and the nature of specialist trading change  markedly when the minimum tick size changes 
and at the beginning of 2003. 11  We sometimes refer to specialist losses in the paper; because 
revenues are demeaned it should be understood that this refers to below-mean trading revenue, 
not necessarily negative specialist trading revenues.  
We envisage sustained losses affecting liquid ity more than a one-day temporary loss.  
Therefore, our analysis sums revenues over five -day periods.  We define the gross trading 
revenue measure, RevGrt-1, the revenue from overnight inventories measure, RevInvt-1, and the 
intraday round-trip revenue measure, RevTrt-1, as the sum of the relevant daily revenue over the 
[t-5, t-1] interval.  The following equation su mmarizes the decomposition (subscripts “m” or “f” 
suppressed): 
 RevGr
t-1  =  RevInvt-1  +  RevTrt-1 . (3) 
 
                                                           
11  For example, specialist participation averages 8.7% during 1994-1996 (when prices are quoted in eighths), 
13.2% during 1998-2000 (when prices are in sixteenths), and 15.0% during 2001-2002 (when the minimum tick 
is a penny).  In early 2003, the NYSE and SEC began to investigate the trading behavior of specialists.  The 
investigation resulted in criminal indictments of indivi dual specialists and fines for specialist firms—see Ip and 
Craig (2003).  Specialist participation declines to 12.5% in 2003 and 10.1% in 2004, the last year of our sample.  
To account for these NYSE structural changes, we speci fy regime changes for specialist revenues on June 24, 
1997 (the adoption of sixteenths), January 29, 2001 (the adop tion of decimals), and January 1, 2003.  A graph of 
specialist participation rates over our sample period can be found in the Internet Appendix. 

===== PAGE 13 =====

 
12 
Inventories:  We obtain the specialist dollar inventory I for each stock i at the end of day t.  
Inventories are summed cross-sectionally each day at the market level or for each specialist firm, 
as appropriate.  Figure 2 graphs the specialists ’ aggregate (market-level) inventories between 
1994 and 2004. 
[ Insert Figure 2 Here ] 
The average aggregate inventory position ove r the 11 years is $196 million.  Aggregate 
inventories have a range of -$331 million to + $988 million and a daily standard deviation of 
$137 million. Inventory is negative on only 163 of the 2,770 days in our sample, so specialists in 
aggregate are net long 94% of the time.  Similar cal culations at the specialist-firm level indicate 
that, on average, a given specialist firm is net long 83% of the time. 
To measure the amount of risk assumed by ma rket makers, we aggregate (signed) dollar 
inventories up to the specialist-firm level or the ma rket level and then take the absolute value to 
get the magnitude of the overall position at the end of day t-1 (subscripts m or f suppressed): 
 Invt-1  =  ∑ −
i
tiI 1, . (4) 
Dynamic models with market-maker invent ories, e.g., Amihud and Mendelson (1980) and 
Madhavan and Smidt (1993), predict that market ma kers mean revert their inventories towards 
target levels.  Madhavan and Smidt (1993) find empi rically that the target level is greater than 
zero, which we also find using our more recent sample period.  Nevertheless, the amount of 
capital needed and the total risk borne by the speci alist are proportional to the absolute inventory 
level, so the financing constraints story implies that we should work with the absolute value of 
inventories rather than deviations from target positions. 

===== PAGE 14 =====

 
13 
Returns:  We measure the daily return of the valu e-weighted market portfolio of NYSE stocks, 
as well as the return on the valued-weighted portfolio of common stocks assigned to each 
specialist firm.  Returns, rt-1, are averaged over five days ( t-1 to t-5) and used as a predictor 
variable in our analysis (subscript “m” or “f” has been suppressed): 
 Rett-1  =  ∑
=
−
5
15
1
j
jtr . (5) 
 
Volatility:  To measure changes in volatility we estimate the asymmetric GARCH(1,1) model of 
Glosten, Jagannathan, and Runkle (1993).  We use the daily log value-weighted return on the 
market or on the portfolio of stocks assigned to a particular specialist firm (subscript “ m” or “f” 
suppressed), which is normally distributed with mean μ and conditional variance ht given by: 
 1
2
1
2
11    −−−− +++= ttttt Duuhh φαδκ , (6) 
where ut = rt – μ is distributed N(0, ht), and Dt-1 = 1 if ut-1 ≥ 0 and Dt-1 = 0 otherwise.  In order to 
match the treatment of effective spreads, we define the conditional return variance measure as: 
 VarRett = ht – ∑
=
−
10
65
1
j
jth . (7) 
Many of the variables used in this paper ar e calculated relative to recent means over the 
interval [ t-10, t-6].  This is a hybrid between working with levels and working with first 
differences.  Pure first differences are not appr opriate, since there is no theoretical reason to 
believe that any of the variables (liquidity, vol atility, etc.) contain a unit root.  Levels are not 
appropriate in the presence of apparent non-st ationarity.  While we are not aware of any 
econometric theory that directly addresses our appr oach of subtracting off recent means, such an 
approach is common in other areas of fina nce (see for example the relative T-bill yield 
introduced by Campbell (1991) and now common in the return predictability literature).  The 

===== PAGE 15 =====

 
14 
hybrid approach induces a modest amount of moving average behavior, which requires the use of 
autocorrelation-consistent standard errors throughout the paper. 
A.  Descriptive statistics 
Table I contains correlations and standard devi ations for the market-wide variables used in 
this paper.  Aggregate specialist revenues ( RevGrm,t-1) are fairly volatile, with a standard 
deviation of $16.1 million around the regime mean s.  Note that all revenue variables are 
aggregated over five trading days, so the standard  deviations essentially refer to weekly trading 
revenues.  Revenues from intraday round-trips ( RevTrm,t-1) are more volatile than revenues from 
overnight inventory ( RevInvm,t-1), with respective daily standard  deviations of $13.9 million and 
$7.7 million.  As a result, the 0.88 contemporaneous correlation between RevTrm,t-1 and 
RevGrm,t-1 is much higher than the 0.50 correlation between RevInvm,t-1 and RevGrm,t-1.  
Interestingly, the two components of specialis t revenues are virtually uncorrelated with each 
other ( ρ = 0.03), while revenues from overnight inventory are strongly correlated with 
contemporaneous stock market returns ( ρ = 0.59). The latter correlation makes sense given our 
earlier observation that aggregate specialist inventories are almost always net long. 
[ Insert Table I Here ] 
Given that we are using absolute values of inventories and specialist trading revenues as 
proxies for financing constraints, we expect the tw o measures to be negatively related.  This is 
indeed the case, especially for revenues fr om overnight inventory positions.  While the 
correlation between inventories and RevGrm,t-1 or RevTrm,t-1 are a modest –0.15 or 0.08, 
respectively, the correlation of inventories with RevInvm,t-1 is a much stronger –0.44.  The latter 
correlation is a function of the average long sp ecialist position combined with the specialist’s 
liquidity provision role.  Specialists tend to find themselves with even bigger long positions 

===== PAGE 16 =====

 
15 
when the market declines (the contemporaneous correlation between ending inventories on day 
t–1 and the 5-day market return ending on day t–1 is –0.55), and they lose money in the process.   
III.  Market-level Liquidity 
The main empirical goal of the paper is to te st whether economic state variables related to 
financing constraints can account for the observed time-series variation in stock market liquidity.  
Our main innovation is to use specialist revenues and specialist inventories as proxies for the 
financial constraints faced by intermediaries.  Control variables account for other possible 
mechanisms, such as the standard theoretical  link between conditional volatility and market 
liquidity that is present in most microstructure models.  
We start by simply regressing market-wide effective spreads on day t on aggregate gross 
trading revenues summed over the interval [ t-5, t-1].  The results are in the first column of Table 
II.  The coefficient on RevGrm,t-1 is only marginally different from zero.  At first glance, this 
result would seem to provide little support for a financing constraints story, because it is 
aggregate losses that should weaken a market-maker’s capital position and make it more difficult 
to finance trading positions.  However, specifica tion (2) in the same table reveals that when 
gross trading revenues are decomposed into re venues associated with overnight inventory 
(RevInv
m,t-1) and revenues associated with intraday round-trips ( RevTrm,t-1), inventory revenues 
have a large negative effect on spreads, while  the coefficient on round-trip revenues  is 
indistinguishable from zero.  
[ Insert Table II Here ] 
Throughout the paper, we focus on revenues asso ciated with overnight inventories because 
there are confounding effects be tween intraday trading revenues and future spreads.  RevTr is 
essentially the total dollar amount of effec tive spread earned on intraday round-trips by 

===== PAGE 17 =====

 
16 
specialists less the associated losses to informed traders.  Thus, it is a realized or net spread for 
specialists.  If realized spreads are persistent for whatever reason (say, for example, that the 
specialist has market power or the amount of intrad ay specialist trading is persistent), then the 
relationship between today’s RevTr and tomorrow’s spread could be fairly mechanical.  If RevTr 
and spreads both increase today, they are likel y to both remain high tomorrow, and a higher 
RevTr today ends up predicting a higher effective spread tomorrow. 
In contrast, inventory-related revenues are not m echanically tied to spreads in this way.  For 
this reason, results involving inventory-related re venues are easy to interpret.  When specialists 
make money on their inventories, market-wide spreads tend to be narrow in the next period.  The 
statistical evidence is compelling, as revenues alone explain about 20% of the daily variance in 
the proportional effective spread measure.  In terms of economic magnitude, specification (2) in 
Table II shows that if inventory-related revenue s are one standard deviation greater (equal to 
$7.7 million from Table I), the aggregate effec tive spread measure is 7.7 * -44.94 / 1000 = 0.35 
basis points narrower on average the next day.  Th is amount is a little less th an half of the daily 
standard deviation of 0.77 basis points from Table I for the spread measure itself.  
Financial constraints are generally non-linear, so we look next at whether liquidity is more 
sensitive to extreme specialist losses.  In  specification (3) we add a kink to both RevInv
m,t-1 and 
RevTrm,t-1 at their lowest quartiles (25 th percentile).  Consistent w ith theory, large losses are 
associated with wider spreads, and the non-linear ity is fairly pronounced.  Based on the numbers 
in Panel A, the slope coefficient on RevInvm,t-1 is about –44.85 for the majority of days and –
69.70 (= –44.85 – 22.85) in the lowest quartile of the inventory revenues distribution. 
Turning to our balance sheet proxy, we next  test the spread-inventory relationship.  
Specification (4) includes only a constant and the absolute value of aggregate specialist 

===== PAGE 18 =====

 
17 
inventories (in hundreds of millions of dollars) as right-hand side variables.  We find that large 
inventories yesterday imply wide spreads today:  an additional $100 million in inventory, which 
is slightly less than a one-standard deviation change, corresponds to an increase of 0.187 basis 
points in our proportional effective spread measure.   In specification (5), we add a kink to the 
linear relation between inventories and future  liquidity, located at the upper quartile (75 th 
percentile) of the absolute inventory distributi on.  The idea is that when inventories are 
particularly large in either direction, market makers may be more constrained and require more 
compensation to provide liquidity.  The data rev eal strong evidence of this kind of non-linearity.  
On typical days, each additional $100 million in aggregate inventories implies a next-day 
market-wide effective spread that is 0.085 basi s points wider.  But wh en inventories are beyond 
the 75
th percentile, the sensitivity of spreads to inventories more than doubles. 
In addition to our market-maker state variable s, there are other variables that have been 
theoretically and empirically associated with changes in liquidity.  For example, classic 
microstructure models, such as Kyle (1985) and Glosten and Milgrom (1985), conclude that 
liquidity should be decreasing in the variance of fundamentals.  On the empirical side, Chordia, 
Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2000, 2001) show that when  markets fall, liquidity dries up.  Perhaps 
our revenue and inventory variables are simply co -linear with these other, previously identified 
effects.  For example, since specialists are ne t long over 94% of the time, we know that profits 
on overnight inventory positions will be quite correla ted with market returns (Table I shows that 
the correlation between the two is 0.59).  Simila rly, the specialist’s obligation to buffer order 
flow suggests that inventories are likely to gr ow large following a sharp market decline (the 
Table I correlation between absolute inventor ies and returns is –0.55).  While financing 
constraints plus average net long inventory positions together imply a correlation between 

===== PAGE 19 =====

 
18 
market returns and next period’s average liquidity , a financing constraint explanation is even 
more plausible if markets become illiquid when sp ecialists lose money or take on large positions 
without big market moves. 
Specification (6) of Table II combines specialis t revenue variables, absolute inventories, 
market returns, and the conditional return variance in the following regression:  
 .,,51,41,31,21,1, tmtmtmtmtmtmtm VarRetRetInvRevTrRevInvSpr εβββββα ++++++= −−−−  (8) 
As noted above, there is a fair bit of collinearity  between the various explanatory variables, so 
not all of the right-hand side variables remain si gnificant.  However, we find that the coefficient 
on revenues from overnight inventory RevInvm,t-1 remains negative and strongly statistically 
significant.  When specialists lose money overall,  spreads are wider than average, even if the 
market is not falling at the same time. 12     
In the final specification of Table II, we allow a non-linear effect for both revenues and 
inventories.  While specification (7) asks a lot of the data (given the collinearity between most of 
the explanatory variables), we continue to find evidence that the predictability is biggest when 
specialists take on large positions and when they  suffer the biggest losses on their overnight 
inventory positions. 
For robustness, we have also confirmed that our  quasi-differencing is not driving the results.  
We estimate a daily vector autoregression with fi ve lags on spreads, market returns, absolute 
market returns, intraday and overnight specialist revenues, and specialist inventories, taking a 
piecewise linear time trend out of the spreads for each tick regime.  We get similar results on the 
                                                           
12  An examination of dollar spreads shows that this result is not due to a mechanical relationship between 
proportional spreads and the stock price level when spread s are limited by a discrete price grid,  Results for 
spreads measured in dollars can be found in the Internet Appendix available at 
http://www.afajof.org/supplements.asp. 

===== PAGE 20 =====

 
19 
importance of specialist inventories and revenues;  the results are available in the Internet 
Appendix. 
The aggregate evidence strongly supports a role for financial constraints in shaping stock 
market liquidity.  However, financial constraint s should operate at the level of the financial 
intermediary.  Therefore, we turn next to more  disaggregated data to test whether they too 
support a capital constraint story. 
IV.  Liquidity at the Specialist-Firm Level 
If specialists are marginal liquidity suppliers , then a stock’s liquidity should suffer if its 
specialist firm faces financing constraints.  In particular, if specialist firm revenues are 
imperfectly correlated cross-sectionally, different  specialist firms may face financing constraints 
at different times, and we might obtain greater st atistical power by conducting the analysis at the 
specialist-firm level.  At the end of our sample , there are only seven specialist firms, each with a 
broadly diversified list of assigned stocks.  Faci ng little idiosyncratic risk, these specialist firms 
are likely to generate revenues and take on inventor ies that are highly correlated with each other.  
However, at the beginning of the sample, there are 41 specialist firms and considerable cross-
sectional dispersion in revenues and inventories.  This dispersion aids identification. 
We work with specialist firms rather than  individual specialists because Coughenour and 
Saad (2004) find evidence that capital is allocated  at the firm level.  They conclude that 
“information about inventory and profits is shar ed and that firm capital constraints and other 
characteristics can affect the provision of liquidity.” (p. 43).  In conversations with us, the former 
head of a large specialist firm agreed with th at assessment.  He noted that if firm-wide 
inventories got too large, for example, his sp ecialist-firm risk managers would tell every 
specialist to widen the quote, step back for a while (reduce liquidity provision), and then begin to 

===== PAGE 21 =====

 
20 
reduce positions.13  Internal risk managers would typically  step in well short of approaching any 
external constraint. 
To proceed, we create an unbalanced panel of specialist-firm level data with one daily 
observation for each specialist firm.  We quasi-di fference and demean all variables as discussed 
in Section II.  In particular, we calculate gross trading revenues for each specialist firm f ending 
on day t ( RevGrf,t), which is then decomposed into overnight inventory-related revenues 
(RevInvf,t) and intraday round-trip revenues (RevTrf,t).  We calculate the absolute dollar inventory 
position ( Invf,t) for each specialist firm based on its assigned stocks each day.  The value-
weighted effective spread measure Spr(%)f,t) is calculated each day for the portfolio of stocks 
assigned to each specialist firm.  We also  calculate the value-weighted return ( Retf,t) on the 
portfolio of assigned stocks in excess of the a ggregate market return, along with the associated 
conditional volatility (VarRetf,t) using an asymmetric GARCH model. 
Table III shows average within-firm correlations and standard deviations for the specialist-
firm panel.  The general correlation patterns from the market-level analysis in Table I carry over 
to the specialist-firm level.  Note that corre lation magnitudes are generally smaller when using 
specialist-firm level data.  Specialist-firm gross trading revenues ( RevGrf,t-1) have a standard 
deviation of $1.20 million around the regime means.   Again, weekly revenues from intraday 
round-trips ( RevTrf,t-1) are substantially more volatile ( σ = $1.03 million) than revenues from 
overnight inventory ( RevInvf,t-1), with a standard deviati on of $0.52 million.  The two 
components of specialist-firm revenue are somewhat negatively correlated with each other ( ρ = -
                                                           
13  Interestingly, at high frequencies (trade by trade), Na ik and Yadav (2003a) find that stock-level inventories help 
predict a London Stock Exchange dealer’s quote placing be havior, but firm-wide inventories do not.  At high 
frequencies, dealers may not be instantaneously aware of  changes in firm-wide state variables and may only be 
able to condition on own-stock variables. 

===== PAGE 22 =====

 
21 
0.10).  The correlation between RevInvf,t-1 and contemporaneous stock market returns Retf,t-1 
(ρ = 0.31) is more modest than at the market-level. 
[ Insert Table III Here ] 
There is substantial heterogeneity across specialist firms.  Differences include firm size, 
organizational structure, and types of stocks a ssigned.  Thus, we expect considerable cross-
sectional heterogeneity in regression coefficien ts on inventory and revenue variables.  For 
example, a $1 million trading loss could be a signi ficant event for a small specialist firm, but not 
at all unusual for a large specialist firm.  To handle this heterogeneity, we estimate a separate 
time-series regression for each specialist firm.
14  We report cross-sectional average coefficients, 
and standard errors account for both cross-sec tional correlation across specialist firms and time-
series persistence within specialist firms (see Appendix B for details). 
[ Insert Table IV Here ] 
Specification (1) shows that, in contrast to earlier regressions at the aggregate level, 
specialist firm gross trading revenues are significan t predictors of next-day liquidity in that 
firm’s assigned stocks.  As discussed earlie r, there could be confounding effects between 
intraday revenues ( RevTrf,t-1) and future spreads, so we again decompose the specialist firm’s 
daily gross revenues and focus on revenues that arise from overnight inventory ( RevInvf,t-1).  
Specification (2) shows that these inventory-relate d revenues continue to predict liquidity at the 
specialist-firm level, with t-statistics above four.  In economic terms, if a specialist firm 
experiences a one standard deviation inventory revenue shortfall of $0.52 million, the spread on 
                                                           
14 Because the tick size changes affect liquidity as may th e consolidation of specialist firms, we actually estimate 
the regressions separately for each “sp ecialist-firm regime.”  Specifically, each time a specialist firm merges or 
the tick size changes, a new specialist–firm regime be gins.  We require at l east 100 observations for each 
specialist-firm regime, although the results are not sensitive to this requirement. 

===== PAGE 23 =====

 
22 
that firm’s stocks the next day is wider by an  average of 1.26 basis points ($0.52 million × the 
slope coefficient of 2.164). 
We look next at non-linearities following extreme specialist losses.  In specification (3) we 
add a kink to both RevInv and RevTr at the lower quartile point (25 th percentile).  As in the 
market-level results, the biggest losses are asso ciated with significantly wider spreads.  The 
slope coefficient on RevInv is about –2,034 on a typical day and about –4,324 (= –2,034 – 2,289) 
in the left tail of the inventory revenues distributi on.  We also find that larger inventories today 
lead to wider spreads tomorrow.  However, the relationship is not as statistically strong, with a t-
statistic of 1.82 in specification (4). 
Specification (6) is the kitchen-sink versi on.  Right-hand side variables include RevInvf,t-1 
and RevTrf,t-1, returns on the portfolio of assigned stocks, and the conditional volatility on the 
portfolio of assigned stocks:  
 .,,51,41,31,21,1, tftftftftftftf VarRetRetInvRevTrRevInvSpr εβββββα ++++++= −−−−  (9) 
Recall that all of these explanatory variables exhibit considerable covariation, so we expect some 
of them to become insignificant when all are in cluded together.  Revenues related to overnight 
inventory survive, but inventor y does not fare well.  When we add kinks to the revenue and 
inventory variables in specification (7), we find that the significant coefficient on RevInv is 
driven by the left tail of the distribution, again consistent with financial constraints binding more 
severely following relatively large revenue shortfalls .  Overall at the specialist-firm level, there 
is evidence that specialist-firm trading revenues and inventories affect next period’s spreads.   
Before we go on, it is worth giving some t hought to the link between the specialist-firm 
results and the market-level results in the previ ous section.  Financing constraints operating at 
the specialist-firm level need not imply strong effect s at the market level.  However, if there is a 

===== PAGE 24 =====

 
23 
strong common factor in revenues and inventories across specialist firms, financing constraints 
would tend to bind for all specialist firms at once, and there would be a market-wide reduction in 
specialist liquidity provision.  To investigate th is, we calculate the contemporaneous correlation 
for both revenues and inventories for each possible pair of specialist firms.  The average pairwise 
correlation of RevInvf,t is 0.215, while the average pairwise correlation of Invf,t is 0.110.  Thus, 
specialist firms tend to lose money at the same time, and they suffer similar inventory shocks. 
Why are revenue and inventory measures positively correlated across specialist firms?  
Because there is a strong common factor in return s, and specialist firms tend to be net long most 
of the time.  If the market is down, specialis ts across the floor are probably accumulating stock 
as part of their liquidity provision, leading to a positive correlation in absolute inventories.  
RevInv
f,t is positively correlated because most specialis t firms are net long, so they all tend to 
lose money on these inventories when the market is down for the day.  In short, broad market 
declines cause constraints to bind at most speci alist firms at the same time, and the specialist-
firm relation becomes a market-wide phenomenon. 
Next, we identify and examine specialist firms that a priori are likely to face financing 
constraints.  In Section V, we compare these firm s to others that are less likely to face financing 
constraints.  And in Section VI, we look at what happens when the more-constrained firms 
merge with deeper-pocketed partners. 
V.  Evidence from Specialist-Firm Ownership Structures 
If some specialist firms have less access to  capital, there should be cross-sectional 
differences in the sensitivity of spreads to invent ories and trading losses.  While we do not have 
access to the specialist firms’ balance sheets or  income statements, Coughenour and Deli (2002) 
identify three firms that are owned by the specialis ts themselves.  The authors also identify three 

===== PAGE 25 =====

 
24 
specialist firms in which the specialists are only employees (corporate ownership).  
Conversations with specialists suggest that specialist-owned firms may have less access to 
capital than corporate-owned specialist firms.  In this section, we investigate whether there is a 
cross-sectional difference in how these two kinds of specialist firms react to trading losses and 
inventory shocks. 
We construct a panel of daily data for thes e six specialist firms, beginning on January 1, 
1994.  Each specialist firm remains in the sample  until it is acquired or March 1, 2002 (the date 
the last of the three specialist-owned firms is acquired), whichever is earlier.  Variables are 
measured at the specialist-firm level as in S ection IV.  We define an indicator variable Dumf,t-1 
which is equal to one for specialist-owned firms and zero otherwise.  We then interact this 
dummy with all of the right-hand side variab les.  For example, a specification with only 
inventories on the right-hand side becomes: 
 
.,1,1,21,11,21, tftftftftftf DumInvInvDumSpr εββαα +⋅+++= −−−−  (10) 
In the above regression, we are interested in the null hypothesis that β2 = 0.  More generally, we 
look to all of the interaction terms for evidence that spreads of stocks assigned to specialist-
owned firms are more sensitive to inventory and revenue shocks.  Standard errors in these pooled 
regressions are based on Thompson (2006). 
[ Insert Table V Here ] 
Table V presents the results.  In each specifi cation, we reject the null in favor of the 
alternative that spreads are more sensitive for specialist-owned firms.  For example, 
specification (1) reveals that a $1 million shock to inventory revenues causes a 0.134 basis point 
change in spreads for corporate-owned specialist firms.  The effect is more than tripled for 
specialist-owned firms.  Specification (2) in th e table corresponds to equation (10), above, and 

===== PAGE 26 =====

 
25 
uses only inventories as an explanatory variable .  The effect of firm ownership structure is 
similarly strong, with a t-statistic of 2.36 on the interacted inventory variable.  When we throw 
revenues, inventories, past stock returns, and conditional return variances into the regression 
together, the specialist revenue variables beco me insignificant, but the coefficient on the 
interacted inventory variable is 10.29, with a t-st atistic of 3.58.  This means that an additional $1 
million of inventory is associated with an additional 0.010 basis points of spread for the 
specialist-owned firm relative to other specialist firms.  
Thus, we have strong evidence that access to cap ital can affect the sensitivity of spreads to 
market-maker revenue and inventory shocks.  Howe ver, it is possible that the stocks assigned to 
specialist-owned firms are somehow different fr om the stocks assigned to corporate-owned 
specialist firms, and that these assignments so mehow account for our results in Table V.  To 
address this possibility, we look next at a time-se ries analysis of the same stocks following a 
relaxation of financial constraints. 
VI.  Evidence from Specialist-Firm Mergers 
In this section we ask:  What happens if financing constraints are suddenly relaxed?  
Specialists should become less sensitive to lo sses and less constrained by large inventory 
positions.  We investigate whether deep pockets  help specialists provide liquidity by studying 
the mergers of the three specialist-owned firms from Section V.  The first merger took place on 
March 20, 2001 when Benjamin Jacobson & Sons was acquired by Spear Leeds Kellogg. On 
October 19, 2001, Bocklet & Company was acquired by LaBranche & Co. The final merger took 
place on March 1, 2002, with Van Der Moolen acquiring Lyden, Dolan, Nick & Company. 
The empirical strategy is straightforward.  We first identify the set of stocks assigned to each 
target specialist firm just prior to the merger.  The same stocks are studied post-merger to see if 

===== PAGE 27 =====

 
26 
there is a change in the sensitivity of spreads to inventories and revenues.  Specifically, we 
define a dummy variable Postf,t-1 for each date and specialist firm that is equal to one after a firm 
is merged and zero otherwise.  We interact th is dummy with each of the included revenue and 
inventory measures to see if there is an identif iable difference in sensitivities post-merger.  As in 
the previous section, the data are pooled.  Th e regression specification with only inventories on 
the right-hand side is: 
 tftftftftftf PostInvInvPostSpr ,1,1,21,11,21, εββαα +⋅+++= −−−− , (11) 
and the relevant null hypothesis is that β2 = 0.  The pre-merger period covers event days 
[-70, -11], or about three calendar months.  The post-merger period is defined symmetrically as 
event days [+11, +70].15  We apply Newey-West standard errors with 10 lags to each pre-merger 
or post-merger period in order to account for time-series dependence in the regression errors. 
[ Insert Table VI Here ] 
The results are in Table VI.  In every case,  we find that the coefficient estimates are 
consistent with the financial constraints hypothesis, though we do not  obtain statistical 
significance.  The lack of significance is perhaps due to a lack of power given the presence of 
only three specialist-owned firms in the sample.  Fo r the set of stocks previously assigned to the 
specialist-owned firm, spreads become less se nsitive to both revenues and inventories post-
merger.  Consider specification (2), for example.   The pre-merger sensitivity to specialist-firm 
level inventories is 132.63, which means that a $1 million increase in inventories increases 
effective spreads by an average of 0.133 basis points, while the post-merger sensitivity to 
absolute inventories is actually slightly negative (132.63 - 145.01) and statistically 
indistinguishable from zero.  This suggests that  the deep pockets of the acquiring firm enable 
                                                           
15  The results are not sensitive to the tim e interval chosen.  The three-month in terval ensures that none of the pre- 
and post-merger sample periods overlap across the three mergers. 

===== PAGE 28 =====

 
27 
these specialists to take on inventory without widening the spread.  The results for specialist 
revenues in specifications (1) and (3) have th e correct signs, but again the results are not 
statistically significant.  For example, the t-statistic is 1.27 on the RevInvPostf,t interaction term 
in specification (1).  Overall, the evidence point s to improvements in the specialist’s ability to 
commit capital to liquidity provision once these sp ecialist-owned firms are taken over, but the 
findings are not statistically strong. 
VII.  Flight to Quality:  The Role of Inventories and Revenues 
The Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2007) model “implies that the liquidity differential between 
high-volatility and low-volatility securities increases as dealer capital deteriorates. … this 
happens because a reduction in [available] dealer  capital induces traders to provide liquidity 
mostly in securities that do not use much capital (low volatility stocks)”. They term this effect 
“flight to quality” because the liquidity of low-volatility (high quality) securities is relatively less 
sensitive to inventory shocks. In our paper, bot h inventories and specialist revenue measures 
identify reductions in available dealer capital, and these variables can be used to test flight-to-
quality predictions. 
Because fundamental volatility is unobservable, we sort stocks into quartiles using their 
realized volatility. Each day we calculate each stock’s rolling 60-day return volatility, lagged 10 
days (i.e., using returns from days t-11 to t-70). We then sort the stocks based on this rolling 
volatility. For the lowest and highest quartiles,  we calculate an aggregate market-wide 
proportional effective spread measure for day t using the same quasi-differencing, demeaning, 
and aggregation methodology described in Section II. The new measures are denoted Spr
t
Loσ and 
Sprt
Hiσ. 

===== PAGE 29 =====

 
28 
To test whether there is evidence of a flight to quality in liquidity provision, we regress the 
spreads of the lowest- and highest-volatility quartiles on absolute inventories and the two 
components of aggregate specialist trading revenues: 
 
.1,31,21,1,
1,31,21,1,
H
mttm
H
tm
H
tm
H
H
Hi
tm
L
mttm
L
tm
L
tm
L
L
Lo
tm
RevTrRevInvInvSpr
RevTrRevInvInvSpr
εβββα
εβββα
σ
σ
++++=
++++=
−−−
−−−
 (12) 
and test the null hypothesis LH
11 ββ =  or LH
22 ββ = against the alternative that the sensitivities are 
different in the two volatility quartiles.  To conduc t the statistical test, we subtract the second 
equation in (12) from the first, regress the cro ss-sectional difference in spreads on the inventory 
and revenue variables, and test whether the relevant slope coefficients are different from zero. 
In addition to this specification, we estimate versions of equation (12) using subsets and 
supersets of these variables, as well as piecewise linear versions.  The results for stocks in the 
low-volatility quartile are in Table VII Panel A, and the results for stocks in the high-volatility 
quartile are in Table VII Panel B.  In specifica tion (2), which includes only the trading revenue 
variables, the coefficient on RevInvm,t-1 is significant and negative for both low-volatility stocks 
(Panel A) and high-volatility stocks (Panel B), and the coefficient on RevInvm,t-1 is more than 
three times as negative for high-volatility stocks, c onsistent with the flight-to-quality prediction.  
The asterisks in Panel B indicate that this cro ss-sectional difference is strongly statistically 
significant.  In fact, the t-statistic is almost six.  The piecew ise linear version in specification (3) 
shows large liquidity effects for high volatility stocks when RevInvm,t-1 is below its 25 th 
percentile.  Specification (4) uses absolute invent ories alone and yields slope coefficients of 
141.87 for low-volatility stocks in Panel A and 470.03 for high-volatility stocks in Panel B;  t-
statistics are 6.41 and 5.54 respectively.  In othe r words, if aggregate absolute inventories are 
$100 million greater, the quasi-differenced spread  measure on high-volatility stocks exceeds the 

===== PAGE 30 =====

 
29 
spread measure on low volatility stocks by an av erage of 0.328 basis points, suggesting that 
market makers are concentrating their limited ri sk-bearing capacity in the most liquid stocks.  
Specification (5) shows that inve ntory effects are also non-linear; the flight-to-quality effect is 
somewhat larger when absolute aggregate invent ory is above its 75th percentile value.  Finally, 
specifications (6) and (7) show that when all th e specialist variables are included in the same 
regression along with market returns and conditi onal volatility, the coefficients on revenues and 
inventories are larger for high-volatility stocks th an for low-volatility stocks, consistent with a 
flight-to-quality effect.  Note that the differe nce in the inventory revenue coefficients is 
statistically significant while the difference in the inventory coefficients is not. 
[Insert Table VII here] 
The same kind of flight to quality should also be  apparent at the specialist-firm level. We 
replace market-wide variables with specialist-fi rm level absolute inventories and revenue 
variables, and we sort each specialist firm’s assigned stocks into quartiles based on realized 
volatility. Each day we calculate the average pr oportional effective spread for the lowest- and 
highest-volatility quartiles, 16 regress spread measures on specialist-firm level inventories and 
revenue measures, and test the null that the releva nt pair of coefficients is the same for low-
volatility and high-volatility stocks.17 
[Insert Table VIII here] 
The results are in Table VIII and are qualitativel y similar to the market-wide results from 
Table VII.  In specifications (2) and (3), the coefficient on revenues from overnight inventories 
                                                           
16 At the specialist firm level, spreads are quite noisy for stocks in the high-volatility quartile.  Therefore, we 
winsorize the spread data series at the 1% and 99% levels to control for extreme values. 
17 As in the earlier analysis at the specialist firm level (Table IV), we estimate time-series regressions separately for 
each specialist firm because of potentia l specialist-firm heterogeneity.  We report average coefficient estimates 
and estimate standard errors which are robust to both cr oss-sectional correlation across specialist firms and time-
series persistence within specialist firms (see Appendix B for details).   

===== PAGE 31 =====

 
30 
(RevInvf,t-1) is significantly more negative for high-volatility stocks.  In specifications (4) and (5), 
high-volatility spreads are marginally more sensitiv e to inventory levels.  When lagged market 
returns and conditional variances are added in specifications (6) and (7), the difference in the 
inventory revenue coefficients remains marginally significant, but the difference in the inventory 
coefficients does not.  Overall, the evidence at bot h the market level and the specialist-firm level 
is consistent with the flight-to-quality story. 
VIII.  Conclusions 
In this paper, we use an 11-year panel of  daily specialist inventories and revenues on 
individual NYSE stocks to explore the relations between liquidity and market-maker financial 
variables.  At the aggregate level and at the speci alist-firm level, we show that when specialists 
find themselves with larger positions or lose m oney on their inventories, effective spreads are 
significantly wider in the days that follow.  Wh en we include inventories, inventory-related 
specialist revenues, market returns, and conditi onal return volatility at the aggregate market 
level, we find that inventories, revenues, a nd volatility have incremental predictive power for 
future liquidity.  This suggests that market-mak er financial constraints can help us understand 
time variation in liquidity, while also acknowledging the traditional mechanisms of 
microstructure theory that link price volatility and liquidity.   
NYSE specialists are the most important liquid ity suppliers of NYSE-listed stocks, given the 
structural advantages that accrue to specialis ts over our sample period.  Thus, studying the 
inventories and revenues of specialists is ideal for starting to understand time-varying liquidity in 
the world’s largest stock market.  Clearly, there are other competing liquidity suppliers, such as 
market makers on regional exchanges, proprietary trading desks at various Wall Street firms, and 
hedge funds following a market-making strategy.  Information about their financial condition 

===== PAGE 32 =====

 
31 
and trading behavior would be of considerable interest.  But if all liquidity suppliers follow 
similar strategies and suffer similar shocks (Boehmer and Wu (2008) provide some suggestive 
evidence along these lines), our data may be proxying for this much broader market-making 
sector. 
Ultimately, our revenue and inventory measures are somewhat noisy proxies for the presence 
of financial constraints.  It would be useful to obtain direct evidence on changes in collateral 
requirements, credit limits, or financing costs impos ed by lenders in response to trading losses.  
Unfortunately, such data are not readily availa ble to us.  However, Coughenour and Deli (2002) 
identify three specialist firms that are owned by the specialists themselves, along with three 
corporate-owned specialist firms in which the sp ecialists are employees.  Specialist-owned firms 
may have less access to capital than corporate-owned specialist firms.  We find that the 
sensitivity of liquidity to inventories and revenues is greater for specialist-owned firms compared 
to corporate-owned specialist firms.  The sensitivity is also reduced when specialist-owned firms 
merge with corporate-owned firms, consistent with deep pockets easing financing constraints. 
While we use specialist data from the NYSE, it is important to emphasize that our results are 
about market-making, not NYSE specialists per se .  Our results should generalize to other 
market structures.  For example, specialists have become much less important since the NYSE 
adopted its mostly electronic “Hybrid” market st ructure in 2007.  But other liquidity suppliers 
(such as quantitative hedge funds) have taken the specialists’ place, and these liquidity suppliers 
face exactly the same kinds of financing constrai nts.  In fact, given th e U.S. credit crunch of 
2007-2008, financing constraints are probably quite se vere at the moment, and if the data were 
available (unfortunately a big if), it would be ex tremely interesting to see how shocks to the new 
liquidity suppliers are affecting stock market liquidity. 

===== PAGE 33 =====

 
32 
Our results also have implications for theoreti cal work.  Liquidity is a nebulous concept, and 
there is necessarily some distance between liqui dity in the current theoretical models of 
financing constraints and our empirical measures.  For example, most of the theoretical models 
do not attempt to capture the continuous nature of trading and instead employ Walrasian auctions 
that are not fully dynamic and have no explicit bid- ask spread.  In that sense, our findings move 
ahead of existing theory, and developing an e xplicit dynamic inventory management problem in 
the face of financing constraints could be a promising avenue for future research. 
Finally, our results have potential policy imp lications. Because liquidity is a public good 
with positive externalities for all traders— Gromb and Vayanos (2002) and Weill (2007)—
financial constraints can lead to an undersupply of  liquidity.  If too little capital is available for 
market making, there are several possible solu tions.  First, regulators could raise capital 
requirements for liquidity suppliers such as speci alists.  This may be beneficial in avoiding 
liquidity meltdowns, but could also raise the costs of liquidity suppliers’ day-to-day operations 
(e.g., opportunity costs of underutilized capital).  Thus, higher capital requirements might make 
supplying liquidity less attractive, potentially driving out existing market makers and/or reducing 
new entry.  Second, there could be subsidies fo r liquidity suppliers through reduced trading fees, 
direct payment for trading, e.g., liquidity rebates for non-marketable limit orders, or an 
advantageous position in the trading environment.  Special privileges for market makers have 
been the traditional mechanism to encourage liquidity provision, but such advantages are open to 
abuse, as seen by the odd-eighths and specialis t scandals on Nasdaq and the NYSE. Third, 
predation of liquidity suppliers should be discouraged, especially when liquidity suppliers have 
taken large capital positions or lost money.  Measuring and defining predation would 
undoubtedly prove challenging, intrusive, and cont entious. Finally, a liquidity supplier of last 

===== PAGE 34 =====

 
33 
resort may be valuable when existing liquidity suppliers have committed most of their capital.  
For example, the Fed’s actions to provide li quidity in 1987 may have prevented a crisis—see 
SEC (1988).  However, having a liquidity supp lier of last resort can cause moral hazard 
problems in the form of excess risk-taking.  To prevent such behavior, regulators could designate 
liquidity suppliers and track their positions a nd trading closely.  In exchange for being 
monitored, market makers could receive more favorable lending terms from the Fed (especially 
during times of low liquidity).  In fact, the recent extension of Federal Reserve liquidity facilities 
to investment banks is exactly a step in this direction, as is SEC chairman Christopher Cox’s 
recent call for investment banks to disclose pub licly more details about capital and liquidity 
positions.18  These moves could have the beneficial effect of reducing the variability of liquidity 
and its sensitivity to various shocks. 
                                                           
18 Chung, Joanna and Ben White, “SEC to require banks to disclose liquidity,” Financial Times, May 7, 2008. 

===== PAGE 35 =====

 
34 
References 
Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin, 2007, Liqui dity, monetary policy and financial cycles , 
Current Issues in Economics and Finance 14. 
Amihud, Yakov, and Haim Mendelson, 1980, Dealership market: Market making with inventory, 
Journal of Financial Economics 8, 31–53. 
Attari, Mukarram, Antonio Mello, and Martin Ruckes, 2005, Arbitraging arbitrageurs, Journal of 
Finance 60, 2471-2511. 
Bessembinder, Hendrik, 2003, Issues in assessing trade execution costs, Journal of Financial 
Markets 6, 233-257. 
Boehmer, Ekkehart, and Julie Wu, 2008, Order flow and prices, working paper, Texas A&M 
University.  
Brunnermeier, Markus, and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2005, Predatory trading, Journal of Finance 60, 
1825-1863. 
Brunnermeier, Markus, and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2007, Market liquidity and funding liquidity, 
forthcoming Review of Financial Studies. 
Campbell, John, 1991, A variance decomposition for stock returns, Economic Journal 101, 157-
179. 
Cao, Henry, Martin Evans, and Richard Lyons, 2006, Inventory Information, Journal of Business 
79, 325-363.  
Chordia, Tarun, Richard Roll, and Avanidha r Subrahmanyam, 2000, Commonality in liquidity, 
Journal of Financial Economics 56, 3-28. 
Chordia, Tarun, Richard Roll, and Avanidha r Subrahmanyam, 2001, Market liquidity and 
trading activity, Journal of Finance 56, 501-530. 
Chordia, Tarun, Asani Sarkar, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2005, An Empirical Analysis of 
Stock and Bond Market Liquidity, Review of Financial Studies 18, 85-129. 
Corwin, Shane, 2004, Specialist performance and new listing allocations on the NYSE: An 
empirical examination, Journal of Financial Markets 7, 27–51. 
Coughenour, Jay, and Dan Deli, 2002, Liquidity pr ovision and the organizational form of NYSE 
specialist firms, Journal of Finance 57, 841–869. 
Coughenour, Jay, and Lawrence Harris, 2004, Specialist profits and the minimum price 
increment, working paper, University of Delaware.  
Coughenour, Jay, and Mohsen Saad, 2004, Co mmon market makers and commonality in 
liquidity, Journal of Financial Economics 73, 37-69. 
Garleanu, Nicolae, Lasse H. Pedersen, and Allen M. Poteshman, 2005, Demand-based option 
pricing,forthcoming, Review of Financial Studies.  
Glosten, Lawrence, Ravi Jaganathan, and Da vid Runkle, 1993, On the relation between the 
expected value and the volatility of the nominal excess return on stocks, Journal of Finance 48, 
1779–1801.  

===== PAGE 36 =====

 
35 
Glosten, Lawrence, and Paul Milgrom, 1985, Bid,  ask and transaction prices in a specialist 
market with heterogeneously informed traders, Journal of Financial Economics 14, 71–100. 
Grossman, Sanford, and Merton Miller, 1988, Liquidity and market structure, Journal of 
Finance 43, 617–633. 
Gromb, Denis, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2002, Equilibrium and welfare in markets with financially 
constrained arbitrageurs, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 361-407. 
Hameed, Allaudeen, Wenjin Kang, and S. Vi swanathan, 2006, Stock market decline and 
liquidity, forthcoming, Journal of Finance. 
Hansch, Oliver, Nayaran Naik, and S. Viswanat han, 1999, Best execution, internalization, 
preferencing and dealer profits, Journal of Finance 54, 1799-1828. 
Hasbrouck, Joel, and Duane Seppi, 2001, Common f actors in prices, order flows and liquidity, 
Journal of Financial Economics 59, 383-411. 
Hasbrouck, Joel, and George Sofianos, 1993, The trades of market-makers: An analysis of 
NYSE specialists, Journal of Finance 48, 1565-1594. 
Hatch, Brian, and Shane Johnson, 2002, The imp act of specialist firm acquisitions on market 
quality, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 139-167. 
Hendershott, Terrence, and Mark S. Seasholes, 2007, Market maker inventories and stock prices, 
American Economic Review 97, 210-214. 
Ho, Thomas, and Hans Stoll, 1981, Optimal d ealer pricing under transactions and return 
uncertainty, Journal of Financial Economics 9, 47-73. 
Ho, Thomas, and Hans Stoll, 1983, The dynami cs of dealer markets under competition, Journal 
of Finance 38, 1053–1074. 
Huberman, Gur, and Dominika Halka, 2001, Systematic liquidity, Journal of Financial Research 
24, 161–178. 
Ip, Greg, and Susanne Craig, 2003, Trading cases : NYSE's `Specialist' probe puts precious asset 
at risk, Wall Street Journal, April 18, 2003, A1. 
Jones, Charles, 2006, A century of stock market  liquidity and trading costs, working paper, 
Columbia University. 
Kavajecz, Kenneth A., and Elizabeth R. Odders-White, 2001,  An examination of changes in 
specialists' posted price schedules, Review of Financial Studies 14, 681-704. 
Kyle, Albert, 1985, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica 53, 1315-1336. 
Kyle, Albert, and Wei Xiong, 2001, Contagion as a wealth effect, Journal of Finance 56, 1401-
1440. 
Lee, Charles, and Mark Ready, 1991, Infe rring trade direction from intraday data, Journal of 
Finance 46, 733-747. 
Lee, Charles, Belinda Mucklow, and Mark Ready, 1993,  Spreads, depths, and the impact of 
earnings information: An intraday analysis, Review of Financial Studies 6, 345-374. 
Lyons, Richard K., 2001, The microstructure approach to exchange rates, MIT Press. 

===== PAGE 37 =====

 
36 
Madhavan, Ananth, and Seymour Smidt, 1993, An analysis of daily changes in specialist 
inventories and quotations, Journal of Finance 48, 1595-1628. 
Madhavan, Ananth, and George Sofianos, 1998, An empirical analysis of NYSE specialist 
trading, Journal of Financial Economics 48, 189-210. 
Manaster, Steven, and Steven Mann, 1996, Life  in the pits: Competitive market making and 
inventory control, Review of Financial Studies 9, 953-975. 
Mildenstein, Eckart, and Harold Schleef, 1983, The optimal pricing policy of a monopolistic 
market maker in the equity market, Journal of Finance 38, 218–231. 
Mitchell, Mark, Lasse H. Pedersen, and Todd Pulvino, 2007, Slow moving capital, American 
Economic Review 97, 215-220. 
Naik, Narayan, and Pradeep Yadav, 2003a, Do dealer firms manage inventory on a stock-by-
stock or a portfolio basis? Journal of Financial Economics 69, 325-353. 
Naik, Narayan, and Pradeep Yadav, 2003b Risk management with derivative by dealers and 
market quality in government bond markets, Journal of Finance 58, 1873-1904. 
O’Hara, Maureen, and George S. Oldfield, 1986, The microeconomics of market making, 
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 21, 361-376. 
Panayides, Marios, 2007, Affirmative obliga tions and market making with inventory, Journal of 
Financial Economics 86, 513-542. 
Pastor, Lubos, and Robert Stambaugh, 2003, Liqui dity risk and expected stock returns, Journal 
of Political Economy 111, 642-685. 
Reiss, Peter, and Ingrid Werner, 1998, Does risk sharing motivate inter-dealer trading? Journal 
of Finance 53, 1657-1704. 
Securities and Exchange Commission, 1988, Th e October 1987 market break, Division of 
Market Regulation report. 
Shen, Pu, and Ross Starr, 2002, Market-makers’ supply and pricing of financial market liquidity, 
Economics Letters 76, 53-58. 
Sofianos, George, 1995, Specialist gross tradi ng revenues at the New York Stock Exchange, 
NYSE Working Paper #95-01. 
Stoll, Hans, 1978, The supply of dealer  services in security markets, Journal of Finance  33, 
1133-1151. 
Thompson, Samuel, 2006, Simple formulas for standard errors that cluster by both firm and time, 
working paper, Harvard University. 
Weill, Pierre-Olivier, 2007, Leaning against the wind, Review of Economic Studies 74, 1329-
1354. 
Yuan, Kathy, 2005, Asymmetric price moveme nts and borrowing constraints: A rational 
expectations equilibrium model of crises, contagion, and confusion, Journal of Finance 60, 379-
411. 

===== PAGE 38 =====

 
37 
Appendix A:  Specialist Trading Revenues 
 
For each stock and each day, we measure the speci alist’s gross revenues from trading.  The gross 
revenues do not subtract costs such as salaries, fees, or technology investments, nor do they include 
possible sources of revenues such as brokerage commissi ons charged to other floor participants.  The 
gross trading revenues ( GTR) of stock i on day t are calculated as in Sofianos (1995) by marking to 
market the specialist’s starting and ending inventor ies and adding the gross profits due to buying and 
selling: 
)()( 1,1, −−−+−= titiititititit IpIpBSGTR , 
where pi,t is the share price of stock i at the end of day t, Ii,t is the specialist’s inventory in shares of stock i 
at the end of day t, Si,t is the total dollar value of stock i sold on day t, and Bi,t is the total dollar value of 
shares bought.  For simplicity we suppress subscripts i in the discussion that follows. 
To further decompose the gross revenues, we define s
tp  to be the specialist’s average selling 
price on day t, b
tp  to be the corresponding average buying price, st to be the shares sold on day t, and bt 
to be the shares bought on day t.  Thus, St = st s
tp  and Bt = bt b
tp  which allows us to re-write gross 
trading revenue: 
 
)()()( 111 −−− −+−+−= tttttt
b
t
s
tt ppIIIppbpsGTR tt  
 
We then expand the first term in parentheses to get: 
 
)()()()())(,min( 111 −−−
++ −+−+−−−+−= tttttttt
b
tt
sbs
ttt ppIIIpsbpbspppbsGTR tttt , 
 
where () ( ) 0,max xx ≡
+
.  Finally, using the fact that It = It-1 + (bt – st), we obtain: 
 
)())(())(())(,min( 11 −−
++ −+−−+−−+−= tttttt
s
tt
b
t
bs
ttt ppIbsppsbppppbsGTR tttt  
 
The first term of this equation captures the diffe rence in buying and selling prices for all round-trip 
transactions that the specialist completes on day t, and we call this round-trip trading revenue RTRt: 
 
))(,min( bs
ttt tt ppbsRTR −= . 
 
The remaining terms are defined as inventory-related trading revenue ITRt: 
 
)())(())(( 11 −−
++ −+−−+−−= tttttt
s
tt
b
tt ppIbsppsbppITR tt . 
 

===== PAGE 39 =====

 
38 
The first two terms of ITR reflect the mark-to-market profits on day t’s changes in inventory (either long 
or short), and the last term is the mark-to-market profit on the starting inventory position.  ITR can be 
thought of as revenues from inventories held overnight.  To be precise, ITR measures revenues from the 
close of day t – 1 to the close of day t on positions that are held at the close on day t – 1 or at the close on 
day t.  Note also that ITR incorporates both overnight price changes (on day t–1 inventory) and price 
changes during day t.  Thus, we have decomposed daily specia list profits for each stock into two parts 
reflecting an intraday spread-related component and a component related to multi-day inventory: 
 
GTRt = RTRt + ITRt, 
 
To calculate aggregate (subscript m) or specialist-firm level (subscript f) market-maker revenues for each 
day, GTR, RTR, and ITR are summed across all relevant stocks.  Specialist participation rates and the 
nature of specialist trading change markedly wh en the minimum tick size changes from eighths to 
sixteenths on June 24, 1997 and from sixteenths to pennies on January 29, 2001.19  Specialist participation 
also changes markedly at the beginning of 2003.  To  adjust for these disconti nuities, we calculate the 
time-series mean of daily specialist revenues in each of four regimes – one for each minimum tick, plus 
an additional breakpoint at January 1, 2003 – and adjust our aggregate revenue measures by the 
appropriate regime mean. 
In the regressions, we aggregate revenues over five  days.  The variables used in regressions and 
discussed in the body of the paper are thus: 
RevGr
m,t = ∑
=
−
4
0
,
j
jtmGTR  
RevInvm,t = ∑
=
−
4
0
,
j
jtmITR  
RevTrm,t = ∑
=
−
4
0
,
j
jtmRTR  
for market-wide measures, and similarly for specialist-firm level revenue measures, subscripted f. 
                                                           
19  The NYSE moved approximately 100 common stocks to  decimals between September and December 2000 as 
part of testing and roll-out plans.  However, the vast majority of stocks switch on January 29, 2001. 

===== PAGE 40 =====

 
39 
Appendix B:  Standard Error Calculations for Heterogeneous Panel Regressions 
 
For specialist firm i, we have Ti time-series observations and a linear relation: 
iiii Xy εβ += , 
where () 0=iE ε , () iiiiE Ω=′εε , and ( ) 0=isitE εε  for all | t – s | > L.  The panel is unbalanced, and 
there may or may not be a time-series overlap for a given cross-sectional pair { i,j}. We are interested in 
the distribution of the cross-sectional average OLS slope vector ∑= iN ββ ˆˆ 1 , where N is the number of 
specialist firms.  We allow for cross-sectional corre lation, so the variance-covariance matrix of the 
average OLS slope vector depends on the pairwise covariances and is given by: 
() ( )∑ ⎥⎦
⎤
⎢⎣
⎡ ′−−=⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛ ′
⎟⎠
⎞⎜⎝
⎛ −⎟⎠
⎞⎜⎝
⎛ −
ji
jjiiENE
,
2
ˆˆ1ˆˆ ββββββββ . 
Using the fact that () iiiiii XXX εββ ′′+=
−1ˆ , we have  
() ( ) () ()[ ] 1111ˆˆ −−−−
=′′′′=⎥⎦
⎤
⎢⎣
⎡ ′−− jijijjjjiiiijjii HGHXXXXXXEE εεββββ , 
where 
( ) [ ]jjiiijiii XXEGXXH εε ′′=′=
−− ,
11 . 
When i = j, and given the assumptions on Ωii, we can get consistent estimates of Gii and thus Var( iβˆ ) 
using Newey-West with L lags.  We proceed analogously with the covariance terms.  We assume a similar 
structure here, namely that ( ) ijjiE Ω=′εε , where ( ) 0=jsitE εε  for all | t – s | > L.  Then 
Gij can be consistently estimated with the following analog to the Newey-West estimator: 
()∑∑∑
=+ =
−−− ′+′+′=
L
k
T
kt
jtktiktjitktjitk
t
jtitjtitij xxxxeewxxeeG
11
,,,
ˆ , 
where 
11 +−= L
kwk  and xit is a k x 1 vector corresponding to the observation for firm i at time t (that is, 
itx′  is the tth row of Xi). 
The first term captures contemporaneous correlation between firm i and j, and the double sum 
captures all of the cross-au tocovariances between firm i and firm j up to the maximum lag L.  Note that 
the summations extend over the entire sample.  In th e case of partial overlap, only those terms where both 
the ei and ej elements are non-missing should contribute to the overall sum.  In particular, this implies that 
Gij = 0 when the gap between the firm i observations and the firm j observations is at least L periods. 

===== PAGE 41 =====

Table I.  Market-level time-s eries correlations and statistics.   The daily sample extends from 1994 through 2004.  Variables denoted with the 
subscript m are aggregated across all NYSE common stocks.  The value-weighted effective spread on day t is measured in basis points, Spr(%)m.  
Spreads are measured as changes from their average values during the time interval [ t–10, t–6].  Gross trading revenues RevGrm are decomposed into 
inventory-related revenues RevInvm and round-trip revenues RevTrm, each measured in millions of dollars.  Specialist revenue variables on day t-1 are 
aggregated over the interval [ t–5, t–1] and are measured relative to the mean of the relevant tick-size regime.  Specialist inventory at the close of day 
t-1 (Invm) is an absolute value and measured in hundreds of millions of dollars.  Other variables include Retm, the value-weighted market return over 
the prior five days in percent, and VarRetm, the forecast of the time t return variance from an asymmetric GARCH model less the average conditional 
variance during the time interval [t–10, t–6]. 
 
 
 Spr(%) m,t   RevGr m,t-1 RevInv m,t-1 RevTr m,t-1 Inv m,t-1 Ret m,t-1 VarRet m,t Stdev 
Spr(%)m,t   1.00       0.77 
RevGrm,t-1 -0.19 1.00      16.11 
RevInvm,t-1 -0.45 0.50 1.00     7.71 
RevTrm,t-1 0.02 0.88 0.03 1.00    13.91 
Invm,t-1 0.31 -0.15 -0.44 0.08 1.00   1.29 
Retm,t-1 -0.48 0.28 0.59 0.00 -0.55 1.00  0.45 
VarRetm,t 0.53 -0.13 -0.52 0.14 0.33 -0.54 1.00 0.71 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 42 =====

Table II.  Aggregate specialist inventori es and revenues and future market liquidity.   Time-series regressions on daily data from 1994 to 2004.  
The dependent variable is Spr(%)m,t, the value-weighted effective spread on day t relative to its average value during the interval [ t–10, t–6],  
measured in basis points.  Inv_Him is the interaction of Invm and a dummy variable which is equal to 1 if Invm is above the 75 th percentile of its 
distribution and 0 otherwise.  RevInv_Lom is the interaction of RevInvm with a dummy variable equal to 1 if RevInvm is below the 25th percentile of its 
distribution and 0 otherwise.  RevTr_Lom is the interaction of RevTrm with a dummy variable equal to 1 if RevTrm is below the 25 th percentile of its 
distribution and 0 otherwise.  Other variables are define d in Table I.  All coefficients are multiplied by 10 3.  T-statistics are in brackets and are based 
on Newey-West standard errors with 10 lags. 
 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
Intercept -42.44 -43.17 -46.83 -419.80 -303.13 -63.21 -34.07 
 [1.51] [1.74] [1.87] [7.70] [6.36] [1.50] [0.83] 
RevGr
m,t-1 - 9 . 2 7        
 [ 1 . 8 8 ]        
RevInvm,t-1  -44.94 -44.85   -14.16 -12.93 
  [8.37] [8.38]   [2.95] [2.69] 
RevInv_Lom,t-1   -22.85    -29.48 
   [1.60]    [2.38] 
RevTrm,t-1  2.09 2.15   -1.27 -1.39 
  [0.67] [0.71]   [0.68] [0.77] 
RevTr_Lom,t-1   -2.99    -1.78 
   [1.27]    [0.92] 
Invm,t-1    187.51 85.06 18.60 -12.14 
    [6.32] [3.16] [0.97] [0.56] 
Inv_Him,t-1     104.59  33.06 
     [5.41]  [2.18] 
Retm,t-1      -331.18 -322.62 
      [4.52] [4.44] 
VarRetm,t      376.79 385.69 
      [6.02] [6.34] 
        
Observations 2760 2760 2760 2760 2760 2760 2760 
R
2 0.037 0.201 0.206 0.097 0.116 0.345 0.356 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 43 =====

Table III.  Specialist firm-level correlations and statistics.  Cross-sectional averages of within specialist-fi rm correlations and standard deviations 
from 1994 through 2004. Variables denoted with the subscript f are aggregated across all stocks assigned to a given specialist firm.  The day t value-
weighted effective spread is  measured in basis points, Spr(%)f.  Spreads are measured as changes from thei r average values during the time interval 
[t–10, t–6].  Variables related to specialist-firm revenues on day t-1 are aggregated over the interval [ t–5, t–1] and include gross trading revenues 
RevGrf decomposed into inventory-related revenues RevInvf and round-trip revenues RevTrf, each measured in millions of dollars.  Specialist revenues 
are measured relative to the mean of the relevant tick-size regime.  Specialist inventories at the close on day t-1 (Invf) are absolute values, measured in 
hundreds of millions of dollars.  Other variables include Retf, the value-weighted return in percent on th e portfolio of stocks assigned to a specialist 
firm, and VarRetf, the forecast of the time t return variance on that portfolio from an asymmetr ic GARCH model less the average conditional variance 
over the time interval [t–10, t–6].   
 
 
 Spr(%) f,t   RevGr f,t-1 RevInv f,t-1 RevTr f,t-1 Inv f,t-1 Ret f,t-1 VarRet f,t Stdev 
Spr(%)f,t   1.00       2.06 
RevGrf,t-1 -0.09 1.00      1.20 
RevInvf,t-1 -0.17 0.61 1.00     0.52 
RevTrf,t-1 0.03 0.62 -0.10 1.00    1.03 
Invf,t-1 0.11 -0.10 -0.21 0.05 1.00   0.07 
Retf,t-1 -0.32 0.20 0.31 -0.02 -0.22 1.00  0.53 
VarRetf,t 0.31 -0.11 -0.25 0.08 0.17 -0.50 1.00 0.89 
 
 

===== PAGE 44 =====

Table IV.  Specialist firm inventories and revenues and future liquidity.  Cross-sectional averages of time-series regressions estimated for each 
specialist firm.  Variables are calculated using the stocks assigned to a given specialist firm.  The dependent variable is Spr(%)m,t, the value-weighted 
effective spread on day t relative to its average value during the interval [t–10, t–6], measured in basis points,.  Most explanatory variables are defined 
in Table III.  In addition, Inv_Hif is the interaction of Invf  and a dummy variable which is equal to 1 if Invf is above the 75th percentile of its 
distribution and 0 otherwise.  RevInv_Lof is the interaction of RevInvf with a dummy variable equal to 1 if RevInvf is below the 25th percentile of its 
distribution and 0 otherwise.  RevTr_Lof is the interaction of RevTrf with a dummy variable equal to 1 if RevTrf is below the 25th percentile of its 
distribution and 0 otherwise.  All coefficients are multiplied by 103.  T-statistics are in brackets and account for both time-series and cross-sectional 
correlation. 
 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
Intercept -5.83 -5.47 -5.42 -208.45 -207.92 3.18 -13.01 
 [0.14] [0.14] [0.14] [4.23] [4.00] [0.10] [0.37] 
RevGr
f,t-1 -1,289.28       
 [ 6 . 8 3 ]        
RevInv
f,t-1  -2,164.15 -2,034.45   -1,030.67 -838.91 
  [6.41] [5.95]   [2.66] [2.21] 
RevInv_Lo
f,t-1   -2,289.07    -1,946.53 
   [3.32]    [3.24] 
RevTrf,t-1  -1,999.19 -2,394.20   -428.30 -425.80 
  [1.86] [2.05]   [0.28] [0.29] 
RevTr_Lo
f,t-1   76,961.86    38,870.16 
   [1.41]    [0.95] 
Inv
f,t-1    4,069.98 -3,218.62 2,265.55 2,419.10 
    [1.82] [0.38] [1.44] [0.75] 
Inv_Hif,t-1     6,714.20  -804.19 
     [1.03]  [0.29] 
Ret
f,t-1      -631.34 -627.55 
      [12.21] [12.53] 
VarRet
f,t      597.52 585.24 
      [8.20] [8.05] 
        
Specialist firms 124 124 124 124 124 124 124 
Average R
2 0.026 0.061 0.080 0.029 0.033 0.190 0.208 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 45 =====

Table V.  Specialist firm ownership structure as a proxy for financing constraints.   Data include the three 
specialist-owned firms and three corporate-owned specia list firms identified in Coughenour and Deli (2002).  The 
panel of daily data starts January 1,  1994 and ends March 1, 2002.  Regr ession variables are calculated using the 
stocks assigned to a given specialist firm denoted by f.  The dependent variable is Spr(%)f,,t.  Explanatory 
variables are interacted with a dummy ( Dum) that is equal to one for specialis t-owned firms and zero otherwise.  
All coefficients are multiplied by 10 3.  T-statistics are in brackets and account for both time-series and cross-
sectional correlation. 
 
(1) (2) (3)
Intercept -31.52 -162.80 -9.29
[2.47] [2.96] [0.29]
IntDum 2.45 45.27 3.08
[0.69] [0.82] [0.09]
RevInvf,t-1 -133.75 -45.18
[2.59] [1.08]
RevInvDumf,t-1 -432.64 -29.61
[3.67] [0.43]
RevTrf,t-1 13.22 -1.08
[7.50] [0.62]
RevTrDumf,t-1 -5.44 4.55
[0.47] [0.45]
Invf,t-1 6.13 1.17
[3.81] [1.19]
InvDumf,t-1 22.78 10.29
[2.36] [3.58]
Retf,t-1 -106.40
[6.27]
RetDumf,t-1 -82.13
[3.23]
VarRetf,t 232.60
[3.30]
VarRetDumf,t 137.02
[1.98]
Observations 10642 10642 10642
R2 0.019 0.012 0.157  
 

===== PAGE 46 =====

Table VI.   Mergers of specialist firms.   Panel regressions for the three specialist-owned firms identified in 
Coughenour and Deli (2002).  We analyze liquidity before (e vent days -70 to -11) and after (event days +11 to 
+70) they merge with larger corporate-owned sp ecialist firms.  Regression variables are denoted f and are 
calculated using the set of stocks assigned to the owne r-specialist firm prior to the merger.  The dependent 
variable is Spr(%)f,,t.  Explanatory variables are interacted with a dummy ( Post) equal to one after the merger is 
consummated and zero before.  All coefficients are scaled by 10 3.  Newey-West t-statistics with 10 lags are in 
brackets. 
 
 
(1) (2) (3)
Intercept 1.46 -474.29 -389.34
[0.01] [1.93] [2.83]
IntPost -186.14 300.94 233.23
[0.76] [1.09] [1.26]
RevInvf,t-1 -1,477.01 441.14
[1.45] [1.00]
RevInvPostf,t-1 1,337.99 -446.13
[1.27] [0.87]
RevTrf,t-1 -371.87 -581.55
[0.60] [1.31]
RevTrPostf,t-1 -14.94 539.89
[0.02] [1.13]
Invf,t-1 132.63 75.27
[1.52] [1.89]
InvPostf,t-1 -145.01 -80.68
[1.63] [1.75]
Retf,t-1 -164.69
[2.40]
RetPostf,t-1 193.95
[2.41]
VarRetf,t 578.82
[4.40]
VarRetPostf,t 203.06
[0.61]
Observations 360 360 360
R2 0.052 0.040 0.439  
 
 

===== PAGE 47 =====

Table VII.  Market-wide flight to quality.  Time-series regressions 1994-2004.  Volatility quartil es are formed using each stock’s rolling return 
volatility from days t–70 to t–11.  The dependent variable is the value-weighted effective spread in basis points of the lowest-volatility quartile (Panel 
A) or the highest-volatility quartile (Panel B) on day t relative to its average va lue during the interval [ t–10, t–6].  Explanatory variables are market-
wide aggregates and are the same in both pa nels.  All coefficients are multiplied by 10 3.  T-statistics are in brackets and are based on Newey-West 
standard errors with 10 lags.  Asterisks in Panel B indicate th at a coefficient there differs from its counterpart in Panel A a t the 10% (*), 5% (**), or 
1% (***) level. 
 
 
Panel A:  Dependent variable is Spr
m,t
Lo
σ, the effective spread for low-volatility stocks in basis points 
 (1)  (2)  (3)  (4)  (5)  (6)  (7) 
Intercept -37.07  -37.64  -40.94  -323.57  -231.06  -95.10  -61.77 
 [1.44]  [1.66]  [1.80]  [7.47]  [6.06]  [2.40]  [1.60] 
RevGr
m,t-1 - 4 . 4 3              
 [ 1 . 4 6 ]              
RevInv
m,t-1   -30.87  -30.72      -13.76  -12.41 
   [7.68]  [7.63]      [3.95]  [3.54] 
RevInv_Lo
m,t-1     - 2 5 . 0 3         - 2 7 . 2 7  
     [ 2 . 3 1 ]         [ 2 . 7 8 ]  
RevTrm,t-1   3.96  4.04      2.36  2.23 
   [2.32]  [2.42]      [1.97]  [1.86] 
RevTr_Lo
m,t-1     - 1 . 1 4         - 0 . 5 5  
     [ 0 . 5 7 ]         [ 0 . 2 7 ]  
Inv
m,t-1       141.87  60.29  34.41  0.03 
       [6.41]  [2.79]  [1.90]  [0.00 
Inv_Him,t-1         8 3 . 5 0     3 7 . 3 8  
         [ 5 . 0 7 ]     [ 2 . 5 0 ]  
Ret
m,t-1           - 2 1 7 . 8 9   - 2 0 9 . 8 5  
           [ 3 . 0 5 ]   [ 2 . 9 1 ]  
VarRet
m,t           1 4 8 . 2 7   1 5 5 . 9 8  
           [ 2 . 1 5 ]   [ 2 . 3 2 ]  
              
Observations 2660  2660  2660  2660  2660  2660  2660 
R
2 0.012  0.133  0.142  0.076  0.092  0.187  0.200 

===== PAGE 48 =====

Table VII (continued). 
 
 
Panel B:  Dependent variable is Sprm,t
Hi
σ, the effective spread for high-volatility stocks in basis points 
 (1)  (2)  (3)  (4)  (5)  (6)  (7)  
Intercept -114.89  -116.76  -132.25  -1,064.35 *** -831.79 *** -326.18 * -297.17  
 [1.22]  [1.35]  [1.54]  [6.51]  [5.39]  [2.28]  [2.02]  
RevGr
m,t-1 - 2 5 . 4 7  * *              
 [ 1 . 9 0 ]               
RevInvm,t-1   -111.82 *** -111.26 ***     -43.40 * -40.72 * 
   [7.31]  [7.57]      [2.59]  [2.49]  
RevInv_Lom,t-1     - 1 0 8 . 7 4         - 1 2 7 . 0 9  * *  
     [ 2 . 3 9 ]         [ 2 . 9 3 ]   
RevTrm,t-1   1.94  2.25      -7.35  -7.40  
   [0.23]  [0.27]      [1.10]  [1.14]  
RevTr_Lom,t-1     - 8 . 3 1         - 6 . 6 5   
     [ 0 . 8 6 ]         [ 0 . 7 7 ]   
Invm,t-1       470.03 *** 264.96 ** 112.82  74.89  
       [5.54]  [2.88]  [1.76]  [0.94]  
Inv_Him,t-1         209.92 *   34.14  
         [ 3 . 0 4 ]     [ 0 . 5 6 ]   
Retm,t-1           - 3 0 0 . 4 3   - 2 8 0 . 2 4   
           [ 1 . 4 1 ]   [ 1 . 3 4 ]   
VarRetm,t           1,039.42 *** 1,083.69 *** 
           [ 6 . 1 5 ]   [ 6 . 6 1 ]   
               
Observations 2660  2660  2660  2660  2660  2660  2660  
R
2 0.026  0.113  0.124  0.056  0.062  0.186  0.202  
 

===== PAGE 49 =====

Table VIII.  Specialist-firm level flight to quality.  Cross-sectional averages of time-series regressions for each specialist firm.  The dependent 
variable is the value-weighted effective spread of the lowest-volatility quartile (P anel A) or the highest-volatility quartile (Panel B) of the stocks 
assigned to a given specialist firm.  The spread on day t is calculated relative to its average value during the interval [ t–10, t–6] measured in basis 
points; volatility quartiles are formed using each  stock’s rolling return volatility from days t-11 to t-70.  Explanatory variables are calculated using all 
stocks assigned to a given specialist firm and are the same in both panels.  Averag e coefficients are reported and are multipli ed by 103; t-statistics are 
in brackets and account for both time-series and cross-sectional corre lation.  Asterisks in Panel B indicate that a coefficient  there differs from its 
counterpart in Panel A at the 10% (*), 5% (**), or 1% (***) level. 
 
 
Panel A: Dependent variable is Spr
f,t
Lo
σ, the effective spread for low-volatility stocks in basis points 
 (1)  (2)  (3)  (4)  (5)  (6)  (7) 
Intercept -238.37  -238.22  -237.23  -468.50  -496.83  -231.22  -248.86 
 [3.84]  [4.10]  [4.09]  [6.64]  [7.32]  [3.68]  [4.09] 
RevGr
f,t-1 - 1 , 3 0 5 . 0 2              
 [ 4 . 3 8 ]              
RevInvf,t-1   -1,497.31  -1,503.79      -804.37  -830.87 
   [4.54]  [4.60]      [2.82]  [2.92] 
RevInv_Lo
f,t-1     - 5 4 1 . 6 8         - 3 0 4 . 5 9  
     [ 0 . 8 4 ]         [ 0 . 5 2 ]  
RevTr
f,t-1   -2,595.12  -2,604.65      -2,810.04  -2,739.52 
   [3.57]  [3.58]      [3.92]  [3.77] 
RevTr_Lof,t-1     5 1 9 . 3 5         - 4 , 3 4 9 . 1 3  
     [ 0 . 1 2 ]         [ 1 . 2 7 ]  
Inv
f,t-1       6,950.63  8,927.60  2,736.72  4,207.16 
       [4.37]  [3.34]  [1.96]  [1.74] 
Inv_Hi
f,t-1         - 1 , 6 4 5 . 5 1     - 1 , 1 4 1 . 5 6  
         [ 0 . 8 1 ]     [ 0 . 6 1 ]  
Retf,t-1           - 3 0 4 . 3 4   - 2 9 7 . 2 4  
           [ 4 . 3 3 ]   [ 4 . 2 9 ]  
VarRet
f,t           4 3 2 . 3 1   4 2 6 . 2 0  
           [ 2 . 7 9 ]   [ 2 . 7 7 ]  
              
Specialist firms 120  120  120  120  120  120  120 
Average R
2 0.019  0.056  0.067  0.026  0.030  0.159  0.172 

===== PAGE 50 =====

Table VIII  (continued). 
 
 
Panel B:  Dependent variable is Sprf,t
Hi
σ, the effective spread for high-volatility stocks in basis points 
 (1)  (2)  (3)  (4)  (5)  (6)  (7)  
Intercept -1,940.57 *** -1,936.86 *** -1,924.09 *** -2,631.36 *** -2,739.98 *** -1,962.73 *** -2,079.26 *** 
 [4.06]  [4.36]  [4.32]  [4.78]  [5.33]  [4.01]  [4.47]  
RevGr
f,t-1 - 6 , 5 8 0 . 1 7  * * *              
 [ 3 . 1 7 ]               
RevInvf,t-1   -6,281.88 ** -6,386.31 **     -4,307.17 * -4,545.18 ** 
   [2.84]  [2.88]      [2.15]  [2.27]  
RevInv_Lof,t-1     - 5 , 7 7 2 . 7 3         - 6 , 2 9 8 . 0 7   
     [ 1 . 4 5 ]         [ 1 . 6 9 ]   
RevTrf,t-1   -16,453.45 *** -16,744.13 ***     -16,666.01 *** -16,854.75 *** 
   [4.03]  [4.16]      [4.12]  [4.25]  
RevTr_Lof,t-1     14,129.56        2,693.43  
     [ 1 . 1 2 ]         [ 0 . 2 4 ]   
Invf,t-1       19,720.00 * 2,734.41  8,202.18  -4,193.10  
       [2.34]  [0.21]  [1.13]  [0.36]  
Inv_Hif,t-1         16,343.90 *   12,735.13  
         [ 1 . 5 6 ]     [ 1 . 3 1 ]   
Retf,t-1           5 4 . 1 8   9 6 . 2 9   
           [ 0 . 1 0 ]   [ 0 . 1 8 ]   
VarRetf,t           2,813.86 ** 2,821.47 ** 
           [ 2 . 2 7 ]   [ 2 . 3 0 ]   
               
Specialist firms 120  120  120  120  120  120  120  
Average R
2 0.017  0.044  0.052  0.014  0.019  0.102  0.114  
 
 

===== PAGE 51 =====

Figure 1.  NYSE value-weighted dollar and percentage effective spreads, 1994-2004. 
 
0.00%
0.05%
0.10%
0.15%
0.20%
0.25%
1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
Proportional effective spread
$0.00
$0.02
$0.04
$0.06
$0.08
$0.10
$0.12
$0.14
Dollar effective spread
Dollar effective spread
Proportional effective spread
 

===== PAGE 52 =====

Figure 2.  Aggregate specialist inventories, daily 1994-2004, in millions of dollars. 
 
-400
-200
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
 
 
 

===== PAGE 53 =====

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Internet Appendix 
 
for 
 
Time Variation in Liquidity:  The Role of Market Maker 
Inventories and Revenues 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 54 =====

 
Table IAi. NYSE Specialist Participation Rate 1994–2004.   The following graph shows specialist 
participation rates over our sample period.  Specialist participation actually rose over much of our 
sample.  The ending rate (in 2004) is  about the same as the beginning rate (mid-1990s).  We discuss the 
participation rate in footnote 9 of the paper.  The widely-reported decline in specialist participation rates 
occurs mainly around the phase-in of the NYSE’s H ybrid market, two years after our sample period 
ends. 
 
 
 
NYSE Specialist Participation Rate:  1994 – 2004 
0.0%
2.0%
4.0%
6.0%
8.0%
10.0%
12.0%
14.0%
16.0%
Participation Rate
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
Year
 
 Source:  www.nyxdata.com 
 

===== PAGE 55 =====

 
Table IAii. NYSE Market Share 1994–2003.  The following graph shows the NYSE market share over 
our sample period.  The market share is actually quite stable around 80% during our sample period.  The 
graph stops in 2003 because the NYSE changed its  market share reporting.  Starting in 2004, the 
exchange provided only combined NYSE and ARCA market share numbers. 
 
 
 
NYSE Market Share:  1994 – 2003 
0.0%
10.0%
20.0%
30.0%
40.0%
50.0%
60.0%
70.0%
80.0%
90.0%
Market Share
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
Year
 
 Source:  www.nyxdata.com 

===== PAGE 56 =====

Table IAiii. Aggregate specialist inventories and revenues and future market liquidity (dollar spreads).  Time-series regressions on 
daily data from 1994 to 2004.  The dependent variable  is the value-weighted effective spread on day t relative to its average value during 
the interval [ t–10, t–6].  Spreads are calculated analogously to the percentage spreads in the text but are measured in cents, Spr($)m,t.  
Inv_Him is the interaction of Invm and a dummy variable which is equal to 1 if Invm is above the 75 th percentile of its distribution and 0 
otherwise.  RevInv_Lom is the interaction of RevInvm with a dummy variable equal to 1 if RevInvm is below the 25 th percentile of its 
distribution and 0 otherwise.  RevTr_Lom is the interaction of RevTrm with a dummy variable equal to 1 if RevTrm is below the 25 th 
percentile of its distribution and 0 otherwis e.  Other variables are defined in Table I.  All coefficients are multiplied by 10 3.  T-statistics 
are in brackets and are based on Newey-West standard errors with 10 lags. 
 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
Intercept -15.58 -15.79 -17.15 -90.03 -55.55 -14.76 -6.42 
 [1.27] [1.34] [1.45] [3.88] [2.70] [0.70] [0.30] 
RevGr
m,t-1 -2.94       
 [1.92]       
RevInvm,t-1  -13.01 -12.99   -8.09 -7.72 
  [6.53] [6.53]   [3.26] [3.11] 
RevInv_Lom,t-1   -8.00    -10.29 
   [1.08]    [1.52] 
RevTrm,t-1  0.27 0.29   -0.69 -0.73 
  [0.27] [0.30]   [0.69] [0.75] 
RevTr_Lom,t-1   -1.27    -1.26 
   [1.46]    [1.07] 
Invm,t-1    36.99 6.72 -1.17 -10.37 
    [2.95] [0.49] [0.11] [0.75] 
Inv_Him,t-1     30.91  9.85 
     [3.11]  [1.02] 
Retm,t-1      29.77 32.78 
      [0.78] [0.87] 
VarRetm,t      126.17 129.39 
      [3.50] [3.66] 
        
Observations 2760 2760 2760 2760 2760 2760 2760 
R
2 0.013 0.058 0.060 0.013 0.019 0.088 0.092 

===== PAGE 57 =====

Table IAiv. Selected Vector Autoregression Results.  The following graphs show orthogonalized 
impulse response functions (IRFs) from a daily vector autoregression (VAR) with five lags on detrended 
aggregate market proportional effective spreads (SPR), value-weighted market returns (rm), return 
volatility as measured by absolute market returns (| rm |), specialist trading revenues from inventory held 
intraday or overnight (RTR and ITR, respectively, as defined in Appendix B), and the absolute value of 
aggregate specialist inventories (Inv).  The spread measure, SPR, begins with the proportional effective 
spread ES(%)m,t from Appendix A and takes out a piecewise linear time trend for each of the four 
regimes.  Two orderings are provided to confirm that the results are similar whether the whole shock to 
inventories and revenues is considered or just the component of the shock that is orthogonal to returns 
and volatility.  We show only the impulse responses of spreads (to shocks to each of the six variables).  
The 95% confidence intervals are bounded by the red lines. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ordering #1.  The first ordering is:  specialist inventory ( Inv), revenues from inventories held overnight 
(ITR), revenues from intraday round trips ( RTR), absolute market returns (| rm |), value-weighted market 
returns ( rm), and detrended effective spreads ( SPR).  Shocks to specialist inventories and shocks to 
revenues from overnight inventories both affect spreads for at least the next two weeks. 
 
 
 Shock to Inv;  Response of SPR Shock to ITR;  Response of SPR Shock to RTR;  Response of SPR
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
13579
-0.20
-0.18
-0.16
-0.14
-0.12
-0.10
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0.00
13579
-0.04
-0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
13579
 
 
 
Shock to | rm |;  Response of SPR Shock to r m;  Response of SPR Shock to SPR;  Response of SPR
-0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
13579 -0.12
-0.10
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0.00
13579
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
13579
 
 
 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 58 =====

 
 
Ordering #2.  We also consider a second ordering that controls for other effects by putting our 
inventory and revenue measures after volatility and ma rket returns  This means that we consider the 
response of spreads to the part of an inventory or  revenue shock that is orthogonal to return volatility 
and/or market-level returns.  The ordering is:  return volatility as measured by absolute market returns (| 
r
m |), value-weighted market returns ( rm), inventories ( Inv), revenues from inventories held overnight 
(ITR), intraday round-trip trading revenues ( RTR), and detrended effective spreads ( SPR).  Inventory 
effects are weaker under this specifi cation than in Ordering #1, but are still reliably present, especially a 
week or so after the initial shock.  Revenues from ove rnight inventories continue to have very strong 
effects over multiple weeks. 
 
 
 Shock to | rm |;  Response of SPR Shock to r m;  Response of SPR Shock to Inv;  Response of SPR
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
13579
-0.20
-0.18
-0.16
-0.14
-0.12
-0.10
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0.00
13579
-0.04
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
13579
 
 
 
Shock to ITR;  Response of SPR S hock to RTR;  Response of SPR Shock to SPR;  Response of SPR
-0.14
-0.12
-0.10
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0.00
13579
-0.04
-0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
13579
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
13579
 

===== PAGE 59 =====

 
 
Table IAv. Specialist firm inventories and revenues and future liquidity (dollar spreads).  Cross-sectional averages of time-series 
regressions estimated for each specialist firm.  Variables are cal culated using the stocks assigned to a given specialist firm.   Most 
variables are defined in Table III in the text.  Spreads are calcu lated analogously to the percentage spreads in the text but a re in cents. 
In addition, Inv_Hif is the interaction of Invf  and a dummy variable which is equal to 1 if Invf is above the 75 th percentile of its 
distribution and 0 otherwise.  RevInv_Lof is the interaction of RevInvf with a dummy variable equal to 1 if RevInvf is below the 25 th 
percentile of its distribution and 0 otherwise.  RevTr_Lof is the interaction of RevTrf with a dummy variable equal to 1 if RevTrf is 
below the 25 th percentile of its distribution and 0 otherw ise.  All coefficients are multiplied by 10 3.  T-statistics are in brackets and 
account for both time-series and cross-sectional correlation. 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
Intercept -8.39 -8.36 -8.11 -43.77 -45.15 -13.86 -24.44 
 [0.74] [0.76] [0.73] [2.94] [2.90] [1.09] [1.85] 
RevGr
f,t-1 -345.79       
 [6.53]       
RevInvf,t-1  -572.34 -519.15   -446.73 -379.97 
  [4.93] [5.00]   [3.19] [2.82] 
RevInv_Lof,t-1   -726.02    -695.99 
   [3.80]    [3.81] 
RevTrf,t-1  118.58 58.69   -13.51 -38.98 
  [0.59] [0.29]   [0.06] [0.16] 
RevTr_Lof,t-1   1,540.82    2,283.42 
   [0.33]    [0.48] 
Invf,t-1    400.39 -2,565.59 921.48 981.02 
    [0.50] [0.79] [1.37] [0.77] 
Inv_Hif,t-1     2,780.63  -256.30 
     [1.07]  [0.24] 
Retf,t-1      7.43 8.03 
      [0.40] [0.44] 
VarRetf,t      196.58 195.41 
      [3.66] [3.56] 
        
Specialist firms 124 124 124 124 124 124 124 
Average R
2 0.012 0.030 0.047 0.014 0.017 0.080 0.099 
 