

===== PAGE 1 =====

 
 
  
Market Making Obligations and Firm Value* 
 
Hendrik Bessembinder 
University of Utah 
 
Jia Hao 
Wayne State University 
 
Kuncheng Zheng 
University of Michigan 
 
 
This Draft: October 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract: 
We model a contract by which a firm engages a Designated Market Maker (DMM) to provide more 
liquidity than would be supplied in a competitive market.  The DMM contract increases trading volume, 
and enhances allocative efficiency, price discovery and firm value.  The model predicts that DMM 
contracts will be most valuable for (i) firms charac terized by substantial information asymmetries as well 
as greater uncertainty regarding asset value, and (ii)  firms whose real investment decisions are better 
informed by improved price discovery, i.e. small, youn g, growth firms.  Our analysis indicates that 
contracts between listed firms and DMMs, which are currently prohibited in the U.S., can represent a 
market solution to a market imperfection. 
*This paper supersedes an earlier working paper titled “Why Designate Market Makers? Affirmative Obligations 
and Market Quality.” The authors thank Robert Battalio, Thierry Foucault, David Hirshleifer, Michael Lemmon, 
Marios Panayides, Uday Rajan, Hans Stoll, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam for useful discussions, and seminar 
participants at Northwestern Univer sity, University of Pittsburgh, Case Western Reserve University, Southern 
Methodist University, University of Texas at Austin, Univ ersity of Utah, University of Auckland, University of 
Sydney, University of California at Irvine, Pontifica Un iversidade Catolica, Fundacao Getulio Vargas, and York 
University for comments. 

===== PAGE 2 =====

 
1 
  
Market Making Obligations and Firm Value 
1. Introduction 
Recent turmoil, including the financial crisis of 2008-2009 and the “flash crash” of May 6, 2010, 
highlight the importance of liquidity in financial ma rkets.  Modern stock markets largely rely on limit 
order submissions for liquidity provision.  There are no barriers to entry, and essentially any investor can 
supply liquidity in electronic limit order markets.  Nevertheless, in practice liquidity has increasingly 
been supplied by specialized “high frequency trading”  firms, who use computer algorithms to quickly 
submit and modify large quantities of limit orders. 1  In contrast to the designated “specialists” who in 
past decades coordinated trading on the flagship Ne w York Stock Exchange, high frequency traders are 
typically under no obligation to supply liquidity.   
The desirability of purely endogenous liquidi ty provision has recently been questioned, 
particularly in the wake of the sharp, albeit brief,  decline in U.S. equity prices on May 6, 2010.   
Kirilenko, Kyle, Samadi, and Tuzan (2011) conclude th at high-frequency firms did not trigger the “flash 
crash” on that date, but may have exacerbated it by  demanding rather than supplying liquidity after 
prices started to fall.  Other commentators, e.g.  Arnuk, Saluzzi, and Leuchtkafer (2011) assert that 
numerous high frequency firms simply “turned thei r algo-bots off and disappeared” from the market 
during the turbulence.  Mary L. Shapiro, chairm an of the United States Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC), highlighted the issue as follows: 
“May 6 was clearly a market failure, and it brought to the fore concerns about our equity market 
structure…. Where were the high frequency trading firms that typically dominate liquidity 
provision in those stocks? ….  The issue is wh ether the firms that effectively act as market 
makers during normal times should have any obligation to support the market in reasonable ways 
in tough times.” 2  
                                                             
1 Brogaard (2010), for example, shows that a small group of high frequency firms participate in about two thirds of 
all trades on the NASDAQ market, while following liquidity-providing strategies.  Menkveld (2012) asserts that 
high frequency traders look “much like an electronic version of the classic market maker.” 
2 From a speech to the Economic Club of New York, September 7, 2010.  Available at 
http://www.sec.gov/news/speech/2010/spch090710mls.htm. 

===== PAGE 3 =====

 
2 
  
In this paper, we introduce a model that assesses the costs and benefits of contracts that require 
liquidity providers to supply more liquidity than they  would endogenously choose.  Contracts that require 
one or more “Designated Market Makers” (DMMs) to provide liquidity are observed on some markets, 
particularly for less liquid stocks. 3  The most frequently observed obligation is a “maximum spread” rule, 
which requires the DMM to keep the “bid-ask spread” (the difference between the lowest price for an 
unexecuted sell order and the highest price for an unexecuted buy order) within a specified width.4   
Our goal is to develop in the simplest po ssible model a framework for understanding the 
circumstances under which DMM contracts can enhan ce trader welfare and firm value, the economic 
mechanisms by which the contracts operate, and to assess factors that affect optimal contracted spread 
widths.5  The model includes three periods.  At t=0, the firm sells the rights to the risky cash flows from 
its existing assets to investors in an IPO.  Invest ors may subsequently become privately informed 
regarding the value of the assets, and are subject to a liquidity shock.  At t=1 secondary trading can occur, 
potentially motivated by either information or liquidity  needs, either in a competitive market for liquidity 
or in a market with a DMM contract.   At t=2 the investor receives the value of the asset in cash.   
As a benchmark, we determine the IPO price that will just induce investors to participate in the 
IPO, given competitive liquidity provision in the secondary market, and given the alternative of 
investing in a completely liquid treasury security.   We then assess the effects of a contract by which the 
firm requires liquidity providers to narrow the secondary market bid-ask spread beyond competitive 
                                                             
3 Charitou and Panayides (2009) report that DMM contracts are employed for at least some stocks in the largest 
stock markets in Canada, the UK, Germany, France, the Netherlands, Sweden, Spain, Italy, Greece, Denmark, 
Austria, Finland, Norway, and Switzerland.    
4 Such obligations typically bind.  For example, Anand, Tanggaard, and Weaver (2009) study DMM agreements on 
the Stockholm Stock Exchange and document that the cont racted maximum spreads are ty pically narrower than the 
average spread that prevailed prior to the introduction of DMMs.  On the New York Stock Exchange, Rule 104 
recently introduced, for a set of  pilot securities, DMMs who are tasked with maintaining quotes that match the best 
existing quotes a specified percentage of each trading day.  However, Rule 104 does not require the NYSE DMM to 
improve on the best quotes at any time.   
5 The answer to the question of why an affirmative obligation to enhance liquidity supply might be desirable cannot 
simply be “because liquidity is valuable.”  A requirement to supply extra liquidity in an otherwise competitive 
market for liquidity provision will impose trading losses on the DMMs, for which they must be compensated.   The 
contract can be valuing enhancing only if the benefits to listed firms and/or traders from improved liquidity exceed 
the costs imposed on liquidity suppliers.       

===== PAGE 4 =====

 
3 
  
levels.  Such a contract has two effects.  First,  it imposes expected trading losses on market makers.  
Second, it increases the equilibrium IPO price, as inv estors take into account the benefits of the being 
able to subsequently trade at lower cost.   Notably,  the increase in the IPO price can exceed the requisite 
payment to the market makers, thereby increasing the firm’s net proceeds.    
Our analysis shows that the narrowing of bid-ask spreads due to a maximum spread rule leads to 
increased secondary market trading, and improves economic efficiency.   In our model, as in the classic 
analysis of Glosten and Milgrom (1985), the bid-ask spread arises due to information asymmetry.  A key 
point of perspective is that, while  informational losses comprise a privat e cost to liquidity providers, 
these are zero-sum transfers rather th an a cost when aggregated across all agents.  Competitive spreads 
compensate liquidity suppliers for th eir private losses to better informed traders, and are therefore wider 
than the net social cost of completing trades.   A maximum spread rule can improve social welfare and 
firm value because more investors will choose to trad e when the spread is narrower.  This increased 
trading can enhance allocative efficiency, as traders who value the asset highly acquire more of it, while 
traders who no longer value the asset highly are able to exit their positions.   
However, we find that the constrained spread th at maximizes the firm’s net proceeds (IPO price 
less payment to market maker) is typically not ze ro, even though the only cost borne by liquidity 
suppliers in our model is that due to asymmetric inform ation.    This result reflects the complex role of 
informed trading in market equilibrium.  A narrowe r bid-ask spread induces more trading.  However, 
trades motivated by information, while privately op timal, can impose their own externality by reducing 
allocative efficiency. 6   In cases where the probability of in formed trading is sufficiently high it is 
possible to reduce rather than incr ease the firm’s net proceeds by c onstraining the spread to be too 
narrow.   Our model predicts that contracts that c onstrain the spread will be beneficial for firms with 
                                                             
6 Hollifield, Miller, Sandas, and Slive (2007) also observe th at the allocative efficiency of a market can be reduced 
by the presence of informed investors who transact based on the divergence of prices from value. 

===== PAGE 5 =====

 
4 
  
greater relative uncertainty regarding asset value,  and where information asymmetry between market 
makers and investors exists, but is not excessively high. 
Narrowing the bid-ask spread has a second potential benefit, in the form of enhanced price 
discovery.  In particular, we show that time 1 trade price becomes a better indicator of security 
liquidation value (as measured by a lower mean square d forecast error) as the spread is narrowed.    
More rapid price discovery provides superior information for real decisions, and can lead to increased 
firm value and improved economic efficiency, as shown for example by Tetlock and Hahn (2007), 
Foucault and Fresard (2012), Holmstrom and Tirole (1993), and Subrahmanyam and Titman (1999).  
The model therefore also implies that DMM contracts ar e more likely to be adopted by firms that benefit 
more from enhanced price discovery to guide real investment decisions.  These will likely be firms with 
large potential future investments, as opposed to firms in stable, mature, industries.   
Our analysis has implications that differ in an important but subtle way from the simple wisdom 
that DMMs are most useful in otherwise illiquid st ocks.  If these stocks have wide bid-ask spreads 
because of high real costs of competing trades, e.g.  due to the inventory costs that Demsetz (1968) 
predicts will be high for thinly-tra ded assets, then the marginal social cost of providing liquidity is high, 
and it is efficient for spreads to be  wide.  In contrast, our analysis focuses on spreads attributable to 
information asymmetry, and shows that DMM contract s can enhance value as long as the probability of 
informed trading is not excessive.   
Competitive bid-ask spreads will widen at those times and for those stocks where liquidity 
suppliers perceive an increased likelihood of informati on-based trading.   Easley, Lopez de Prado, and 
O’Hara (2011) argue that their empirical measure of information asymmetry increased prior to the “flash 
crash” of May 6, 2010, and that high frequency traders withdrew liquidity in response.  Our analysis 
implies that the resulting reduction in liquidity was economically inefficient, and that future flash crashes 

===== PAGE 6 =====

 
5 
  
can be potentially be avoided and firm values enhan ced by contracts calling for one or more DMMs to 
continue to provide liquidity during periods of heightened information asymmetries.   
The model presented here has direct regulatory imp lications.   We show that contracts by which 
a firm compensates a DMM for enhancing liquidity provision in its own shares can enhance market 
quality, trader welfare, and firm value.   However, such contracts impose trading losses on, and therefore 
require side payments to, the DMM.  A regulatory requirement that certain DMMs provide additional 
liquidity beyond competitive levels without such comp ensation would lead to exit from the industry and 
would ultimately be counterproductive to the goal of enhancing liquidity.   
Contracts of the type we assess are in fact observed on some markets, but are currently 
prohibited in the U.S. by FINRA rule 5250, which “prohibits any payments by an issuer or an issuer’s 
affiliates and promoters, directly or indirectly ….  for publishing a quotation, acting as a market maker or 
submitting an application in connection therewith.”
7  The NYSE and Nasdaq markets have both recently 
requested partial exemptions from rule 5250, to al low DMM contracts for certain Exchange Traded 
Funds.8  Some commentators have criticized these proposals on the grounds that DMM contracts “distort 
market forces.”9   Our model shows that the competitive bid-ask  spread fails to maximize trader welfare 
or firm value, due to externalities associated with information asymmetries.  DMM contracts of the type 
considered here comprise a potential market solution to a market imperfection. 
2. Related Literature 
Many authors provide models of market maki ng.  Among these, Demsetz (1968) shows that 
market maker spreads will decline as a function of t ypical trading activity in the stock.  Ho and Stoll 
                                                             
7 FINRA Regulatory Notice 09‐60.  See Venkataraman and Waisburd (2007) and Anand, Tanggaard, and Weaver 
(2009) for descriptions of DMM agreements on Euronext Paris and the Stockholm Stock Exchange, respectively.   
8 See SEC Release No. 34‐67411, available at http://www.sec.gov/rules/sro/nasdaq/2012/34‐67411.pdf.  The 
proposals only call for DMM’s to match the best existing quotes at certain times, and thus are less aggressive than 
the “maximum spread” obligations considered here.  
9 SEC Release No. 34‐67411, page 58. 

===== PAGE 7 =====

 
6 
  
(1980) assess the effects of inventory on market ma ker quotes, while Glosten and Milgrom (1985) show 
that a bid-ask spread will arise if some traders are be tter informed than liquidity suppliers.  Biais (1993) 
compares liquidity provision in a centralized limit orde r market to that in a fragmented dealer market.  
Goettler, Parlour, and Rajan (2005) and Foucault,  Kadan, and Kandel ( 2005), among others, model 
liquidity provision strategies used by limit order traders.  Biais, Foucault, and Moinas (2012) rely on a 
model that is similar to ours in several dimens ions, including a single round of trading, binomial 
outcomes on fundamental asset value, potentially info rmed traders, and exogenous liquidity shocks.  
They focus on market making by well-informed hi gh frequency traders, showing that such high 
frequency participation enhances econom ic efficiency by allowing more  trades to occur, even while 
negative externalities are imposed on other informed traders.  
However, in the literature cited above, as in most of  the literature on market making, the emphasis is 
on endogenous liquidity provision, i.e. on dealer and trader behavior in the absence of any specific 
obligation to supply liquidity.   Only a few authors have assessed the role of DMMs, and only in limited 
ways.  Venkataraman and Waisburd (2 007) consider the effect of a DMM in a periodic auction market 
characterized by a finite number of investors.  The DMM in their model is essentially an additional 
trader who is present in every round of trading, thereby improving risk sharing.  Sabourin (2006) 
presents a model where a designated market maker is imposed in an imperfectly competitive limit order 
market.   In her model, the presence of a designated market maker will cause some limit order traders to 
substitute to market orders, which reduces competition in liquidity supp ly and allows the possibility of 
wider spreads with a designated market maker.    
A small group of empirical researchers have studied  the effects of DMMs on market quality.   
Anand and Weaver (2006) examine the Chicago Boar d Options Exchange (CBOE) when that market 
began to assign DMMs to each option, documenting decreased bid-ask spreads and increased CBOE 
market share following the introduction of DMMs.  Pe trella and Nimalendran (2003) study the Italian 
Stock Exchange, documenting improved market quality  on a hybrid market that includes a designated 

===== PAGE 8 =====

 
7 
  
market maker, as compared to stocks traded on a pure limit order market.  Venkataraman and Waisburd 
(2007), Anand, Tanggaard, and Weaver (2009), Sk jeltorp and Odegaard (2011), and Menkveld and 
Wang (2009) study the introduction of DMMs on Eur onext-Paris, the Stockholm Stock Exchange, the 
Olso Stock Exchange, and Euronext-Amsterdam, resp ectively.  Each study reports improvements in 
liquidity associated with DMM introduction, and positive stock valuation effects on announcement of 
DMM introduction.   
While the empirical evidence strongly supports the reasoning that DMMs enhance liquidity and 
firm values, the evidence does not clarify the source of  the value gain.   Providing enhanced liquidity is 
costly, and the DMMs must be compensated for th ese costs.   Amihud and Me ndelson’s (1986) model 
implies a reduction in firms’ cost of capital due to improved liquidity.  However, this reasoning alone 
need not imply that the benefits exceed the costs.  Our analysis clarifies the economic mechanism by 
which value can be enhanced by contracts that narro w bid-ask spreads, and pr ovides insights into the 
determinants of the optimal contracted spread width. 
3. The Model 
3.1 Overview 
In this section, we introduce a model to assess the po tential benefits of a contract between a firm 
and a DMM.  Our intent is to identify the key economi c issues with the simplest possible model.   An 
alternative modeling approach would be to consider a contract between the exchange where the firm’s 
shares are listed and a DMM.  If the exchange si mply recovers the DMM fee from the firm through a 
higher listing fee, the model remains equivalent to th at presented.  Alternatively, the exchange might 
benefit directly, e.g. in the form of trading fee revenu e that would be enhanced if trading were increased.   
“Make-take” fees, which are differential fees assessed on marketable (those that take liquidity) versus 
non-marketable (those that make liquidity) orders, are employed by a number of exchanges, and subsidize 
liquidity provision when “make fees” are negative.  However, in the absence of frictions Angel, Harris 

===== PAGE 9 =====

 
8 
  
and Spatt (2011) argue that the net (make – take) will be neutralized in competitive equilibrium by 
offsetting changes in bid and ask quotes.  Foucault,  Kadan, and Kandel (2012) present a model where 
make fees are relevant due to a non-trivial tick size.   In contrast, the model we present does not rely on 
any market friction. 
We focus on a single investor who potentially invests in a firm’s initial public offering of stock.   
In the IPO, the firm sells rights to the eventual cash flow from its risky asset.   Proceeds from the IPO, net 
of any payment to the market maker, are paid to the firm’s existing owners.  The IPO investor may want 
to trade again, and considers possible future trading costs in assessing the amount she is willing to pay for 
the firm’s risky equity.   The ri sk-neutral investor chooses between purchasing ownership of the firm’s 
equity and an alternative investment that is free of risk and can be traded without cost.    
The model’s timeline is as follows.   The firm i ssues risky equity at t=0.  The security can be 
traded in the secondary market at t=1, with a liquidity  supplier taking the opposite side of the investor’s 
trade.   At t=2 the security pays a terminal value, V, equal to either H or L, with equal probability.    Let μ 
= (H+L)/2 denote the unconditional expected payment on the risky security.   Prior to t=1 trading the 
investor receives with probability P an information signa l that reveals whether security value will by H or 
L.  We consider both the case where P is exog enously determined, and where the investor can 
endogenously increase P by investing in  information acquisition.   As an alternative, the investor can 
purchase a risk-free Treasury bill that makes a certain final payment also equal to μ, and that can be 
traded without cost.    
The timeline is as follows: 
 
 
 
t = 0: The investor buys the 
risky security or the t‐bill. 
The investor 
becomes informed 
with probability P.  
t =1: The investor buys, 
sells, or holds the risky 
security or the t‐bill.  
t = 2: The security is liquidated.  
The investor 
experiences a 
liquidity shock, ρ.

===== PAGE 10 =====

 
9 
  
As in Glosten and Milgrom (1985), the possibility th at the investor is privately informed gives 
rise to a bid-ask spread in the secondary market for the risky security.   To prevent a complete market 
breakdown requires an extrinsic motive for trade.   Ju st before t=1 the investor experiences a liquidity 
shock, ρ.  A positive ρ implies that the investor’s subjective va luation of the asset has increased, while a 
negative ρ implies that the investor’s subjective valuati on of the asset has decreased.   We do not model 
the determinants of the liquidity shock, which represents any motive for trade other than non-public 
information regarding asset value.  For our baseline analysis we assume that ρ is distributed uniform on 
the interval –
ுି௅
ଶ  to	
ுି௅
ଶ , which allows for a number of closed fo rm solutions.  In Section 3.5.1 below we 
discuss the effects of alternative distributional assumptions regarding ρ.   
At t = 1 secondary trading occurs, and at t=2 the investments pay their liquidation value, either H 
or L for the risky investment, and μ for the Treasury bill.  The risk-n eutral investor maximizes expected 
utility, the ex post outcome on which is the number of units held times the sum of liquidation value and ρ.   
We assume the existence of competitive and risk-neutral liquidity providers who have no 
extrinsic motive for trade ( ρ ൌ 0	for	liquidity	providersሻ, and that trades can be completed without any 
out-of-pocket cost, implying zero-expected profit as the equilibrium condition.  This is consistent with the 
Glosten and Milgrom (1985) model of a dealer market, but also pertains to a limit order market with 
competitive liquidity provision, which seems a reasona ble baseline assumption given a large number of 
potential limit order traders and the absence of barriers to entry.  As in Glosten and Milgrom (1985), the 
zero profit bid (ask) price is equal to the expect ed value of the security conditional on observing an 
investor sell (buy) at t=1.  The investor’s priv ate valuation of the risky equity at t=1 is V*= μ + ρ if the 
investor remains uninformed, or V*= V + ρ, where V = H or L, if the investor has become informed.  The 
investor will purchase an additional unit of equity at t=1 if V* exceeds the ask quote, will sell if V* is less 
than the bid quote, and otherwise refrains from trading.  
 

===== PAGE 11 =====

 
10 
  
3.2 The Treasury-Bill Benchmark. 
As an alternative to purchasing the risky secu rity, the investor can purchase one unit of the 
Treasury bill at t=0, for the price μ.   The zero-profit condition impli es a zero bid-ask spread for the 
Treasury bill secondary market. 10  The investor will not purchase th e risky security unless the expected 
gain is equal to that of purchasing the Treasury security. 
Table 1 summarizes potential outcomes from purch asing the Treasury security at t=0.  If the 
investor has a positive subjective valuation shock ( ρ > 0), she purchases an additional unit at t=1 for cost 
μ.  Her ex post gain from being able to purchase an extra unit at time 1 is ρ, and her final subjective 
valuation for the two units exceeds the 2 μ paid to acquire them by 2ρ.  If the subjective valuation shock is 
zero the investor does not trade in the secondary mark et.   The final subjective value of the treasury 
security equals the amount paid, so the net gain is zer o.   If the investor has a negative valuation shock ( ρ 
< 0) she sells the treasury security in the secondary market for price μ.  Since this was also the purchase 
price, the ex post net gain is zero in this case as well.   Note, though, that the ability to sell at t=1 has 
improved the investor’s utility, as the net gain would otherwise have been ρ < 0.   
Table 1: Ex Post Outcomes from Purchasing and Trading the Treasury Security 
Time 1 Valuation If no t=1 trade If trade possible Trade vs. No-Trade 
V*= μ + ρ > μ  Buy V*- μ = ρ 2V* - 2 μ = 2ρ Ρ 
V*= μ + ρ = μ  NT V*- μ = ρ V* - μ = ρ=0 0 
V*= μ + ρ < μ  Sell V*- μ= ρ μ – μ = 0 - ρ 
 
Incorporating the distributional assumption on ρ, the unconditional expectation of the net payoff from 
buying a Treasury-bill at t=0, with the option to trade again in the frictionless market, is: 
                                                             
10 We assume that the investor cannot short sell the treasury security, or equivalently, that the investor cannot 
borrow at the risk free interest rate (which is zero in the model).   Similarly, the investor cannot sell the risky 
security unless the time zero IPO takes place, which requires through the participation constraint that the investor 
be compensated for illiquidity.  More generally (as in Glosten and Milgrom, 1985), to prevent a complete market 
breakdown resulting from information asymmetries, it is necessary that non‐information‐motivated trade occurs in 
the secondary market for the risky security.   

===== PAGE 12 =====

 
11 
  
ሺρሺ2	ρ|ρ ൐0 ሻ ൌ
ுି௅
ସ  ,                                                              (1) 
which establishes a reservation payoff for the investor.  
3.3 The investor’s trading strategy and payoff on the risky security 
Table 2 summarizes the possible ex post outcomes fr om participating in the market for the risky 
equity security, as a function of the investor’s subj ective valuation, V*, the bid (B) and ask (A) quotes, 
the initial offer price, denoted Q, and the possible payment from the firm to the market maker, denoted M.  
The Table includes outcomes to the in vestor, the market maker, and the firm, with and without trading at 
time 1, to emphasize the gains that arise from secondary market trading.11 
The first row of Table 2 applies if the investor’s subjective valuation at t=1 exceeds the ask quote, 
in which case she purchases another unit in the sec ondary market.  The second row applies if the 
investor’s subjective valuation lies between the bid and ask quotes, and she refrains from trading. The 
third row applies if the investor’s subjective valuation is less than the bid quote, in which case she sells.  
In all three cases, the outcome to the firm in the absence of t=1 trading, displayed in column (iv) 
is Q (the proceeds from the IPO) less V (the value of the asset sold).  With time 1 trading, outcomes to the 
firm, displayed in column (v), are Q less the sum of  V and M (the payment to the market maker, which 
equals the market maker’s expected  trading loss).   The firm theref ore benefits from the possibility of 
secondary market trading if the IPO price is increased by more than the payment to the market maker.   
This payment, M, is determined such that the risk-neutral liquidity supplier has zero expected gain, i.e. so 
that the unconditional expectation of column (vii) outcome s is zero.    In the absence of time 1 trade the 
investor’s ex post outcome is V* - Q.   Given the opportunity to trade at t=1, the investor’s ex post 
outcome (column ii) is 2V* - A - Q if she elects to purchase a second unit at the ask price, V* - Q if she 
refrains from trading, and is B – Q is she elects to sell her share at the bid price.   
                                                             
11 Note  that  the  investor  trades  with  the  market  maker,  not  the  firm.   The  market  maker’s  final  inventory  is 
therefore the opposite of the t=1 investor trade.   

===== PAGE 13 =====

 
12 
  
Columns (viii) and (ix) reports combined gains,  obtained by summing ex  post gains across the 
firm, market maker, and the investor, with and without  time 1 trading, respectively.  Column (x) reports 
the change in the combined gain due to time 1 trad e.  Only the investor’s subjective liquidity shock 
parameter, ρ, appears in these columns.  This reflects that  all payments in the model are zero-sum across 
the parties.  In particular, while the investor can benefit from trading on private information should she 
become informed, any investor gain is a market ma ker loss.  Note that the unconditional expectation of 
the combined gain in the absence of t=1 trading (c olumn viii) is zero, which reflects that unconditional 
mean of the liquidity shock parameter, ρ, is zero.  The gain across all par ties is positive solely due to time 
1 secondary market trading, and can be computed as th e unconditional expectation of either column (ix) 
or column (x). 
Table 2: Ex Post Outcomes from Purchasing and Trading the Equity Security 
 Investor Firm Market Maker Combined 
(i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) (vi) (vii) (viii) (ix) (x) 
Time 1 
Outcome 
If no 
trade 
If trade 
possible 
If no 
trade 
If trade 
possible 
If no 
trade 
If trade 
possible 
If no 
trade 
If trade 
possible 
Trade vs. 
No-Trade 
V* > A: V*–Q 2V*– A–Q Q – V Q–V–M 0 A – V + M ρ 2 ρ ρ 
B <V*<A V*–Q V* – Q Q – V Q–V–M 0 M ρ Ρ 0 
V* < B V*–Q B – Q Q – V Q–V–M 0 V – B + M ρ 0 - ρ 
 
From the viewpoint of the investor, the unc onditional expectation of the net gain from 
participating in the IPO (column iii), given t=1 trading, can be written as: 
ሻ ሿ  + ൧   
        + ሿ.                                                                                                         (2) 
To induce the investor to participate, the firm chooses Q so that the expected payoff ߨequals௧௕௜௟௟.   
 

===== PAGE 14 =====

 
13 
  
3.4 Model Outcomes  
We initially assess the effects of a contract that compensates market makers to narrow the bid-ask 
spread while assuming that the probability that the e quity investor will become  informed regarding the 
t=2 asset value is known and exogenous.   Proofs are provided in the appendix. 
3.4.1 The Competitive Benchmark 
Our first results are with regard to bid and ask quotes and the initial offer price, in the absence of 
a payment from the firm to the market maker.  Bid and ask quotes are determined such that the market 
maker anticipates zero profit conditional on either a custom er buy or sell, and the offer price is set to just 
meet the investor’s participation constraint.   
LEMMA 1: 
For P less than 2/3, the competitive bid-ask spread is A-B = 	
ଶ௉ሺுି௅ሻ
ଶି௉ , and the firm sets the offer price of 
the risky security as: െ
௉ሺுି௅ሻ
ସ  . 
For P greater than or equal to 2/3, the competitive bid-ask spread is A-B = H-L and the sets the offer 
price of the risky security as: െ
ሺଶି௉ሻሺுି௅ሻ
଼  . 
As might be anticipated, e.g. based on the intuition of the model presented by Amihud and 
Mendelson (1986), the competitive offer price is  less than the expected asset value, µ, indicating that the 
IPO price is discounted to reflect illiquidity in the secondary market, for all P > 0.  The competitive bid-
ask spread increases in the probab ility of informed trading for P < 2/3, and increases in uncertainty 
regarding final value, H-L.  The offer price which satisfies the participation constraint decreases with P up 
to 2/3, but increases with P for P > 2/3.   This reflect s that higher P benefits the investor, ceteris paribus.  
However, for P < 2/3 the bid-ask spread increases with  P, and the wider spread more than offsets the 

===== PAGE 15 =====

 
14 
  
benefit to the trader.   For P > 2/3 the competitive spread is already widened to its maximum and the 
investor strictly benefits from a higher probability of becoming informed.   
3.4.2 Spread constraints and net proceeds to the firm.   
We now assess the effects of a contract by which the firm requires liquidity providers to narrow 
the bid-ask spread, and compensates them for doing so.  We focus on a contract that requires the bid-ask 
spread to be no greater than K, and for si mplicity focus on symmetric spreads such that ൌ µ ൅
௄
ଶ and 
ൌ µ െ
௄
ଶ.  
LEMMA 2: Given exogenous P and a constrained bid-ask spread K, the equilibrium offer price is:  
௄ ൌμ൅
௉ሺுି௅ሻ
ସ ൅
ሺଶି௉ሻ
଼ሺுି௅ሻଶ െ
௄
ଶ. 
 
Note that for any constrained spread, K, the offer price increases as P increases, as 
ப୕ే
ப୔ ൌ
ሺୌି୐ି୏ሻሺୌି୐ା୏ሻ
ସሺୌି୐ሻ ൐0 .   The investor benefits from higher probability of becoming informed, and 
given a constrained spread, does not pay higher trading costs to offset.   
 
We next turn to the effect of the spread constraint on the firm’s offering proceeds. 
PROPOSITION 1: The firm’s IPO proceeds always increase as  the t=1 bid-ask spread is further 
constrained relative to the competitive spread.   
  
When ൑
ଶ
ଷ, ൌ
ሺଶି௉ሻ
଼ሺுି௅ሻଶ െ
௄
ଶ ൅
௉ሺுି௅ሻ
ଶ  > 0 
When ൒
ଶ
ଷ,   ൌ
ሺଶି௉ሻ
଼ሺுି௅ሻଶ െ
௄
ଶ ൅
ሺଶା௉ሻ∗ሺுି௅ሻ
଼ 	൐ 	 0 
Proposition 1 shows that the firm captures benefits  from constraining the t=1 spread in the form 
of a higher t=0 offer price.   However, constraine d the spread to be less than the zero-profit spread 

===== PAGE 16 =====

 
15 
  
necessarily imposes expected trading losses on liquidity providers.  To in duce the liquidity providers to 
accept the constraint requires a side payment to compensate for expected trading losses.   
 
LEMMA 3: For constrained spreads narrower than the comp etitive benchmark, the liquidity provider’s 
expected market making loss, M, which also equals the requisite payment from the firm to the market 
makers, depends on the constraint K according to: 
ൌ
ሻ
ሻଶ െ
ሻ
4ሻ
2 ൐0 , 
and the effect of the spread constraint on market making loss is: 
ܯ߲
ܭ߲ൌ
ሻ
ሻ ൏0 . 
 
Lemma 3 shows that market maker loss always incr eases as the contracted spread width is narrowed 
relative to the competitive spread.     
 
Proposition 1 shows that the firm’s IPO price is incr eased by constraining secondary market spreads, 
while Lemma 3 demonstrates that the losses imposed on  market makers, which must be compensated by 
the firm, increase as spreads are more constrained.   These results are intuitive.   The central issue is 
whether the IPO proceeds are increased by more than the requisite payment to the market makers. 
 
LEMMA 4: The firm’s net proceeds (FNP), defined as the IPO proceeds less the payment to the market 
maker, depend on the spread constraint, K, according to:  
ൌെ
ሺଶି௉ሻ
଼ሺுି௅ሻଶ ൅
௉
ସ൅
ଶሺுା௅ሻି௉ሺுି௅ሻ
ସ .                                        (4) 
We now assess the relation between the constrained spread and the firm’s net proceeds. 

===== PAGE 17 =====

 
16 
  
PROPOSITION 2:  Constraining the spread to an optimal width of ∗ ൌ
௉ሺுି௅ሻ
ଶି௉  increases IPO proceeds by 
more than the required payment to market makers.   
Proposition 2 demonstrates the existen ce of an optimal spread constraint . Note that the value-maximizing 
spread is non-zero.  When P < 2/3, the value maximi zing spread K* is half of the competitive spread.  
When P > 2/3, K* exceeds half of the competitive spread .  Note also that the optimal constrained spread 
is strictly increasing in uncertainty regarding value (H-L), and in the probability of informed trading, P, as 
displayed on Figure 1.    
 
Figure 1 Optimal Constrained Spread for various P and (H-L) 
Figure 2 depicts the increase in IPO proceeds, net of the requisite payment to market makers, 
when the spread is set at K*, for various levels of  P, and given that H=2 and L=1.   Net proceeds are 
enhanced for all P except P = 0 (when the unconstrained spread is zero) and when P = 1. The increase in 
net proceeds is largest for P = 2/3.  
Proposition 2 comprises the central result of this paper.   It implies that firm value is enhanced by 
a contract requiring liquidity providers to narrow sp reads beyond competitive levels, even when the firm 
compensates liquidity providers for expected trading losses.   It also provides the empirically testable 


===== PAGE 18 =====

 
17 
  
implications that that the value-maximizing spre ad is positive, increases in both the probability of 
informed trading, P, and increases in the degree of uncertainty regarding asset value, H-L. 
 
Figure 2 Enhanced Net IPO proceeds with the optimal constrained spread, for various P. 
To understand why firm value can be improved by constraining the spread such that liquidity 
providers suffer trading losses, recognize that bid-ask spreads arise in this model only due to information 
asymmetries.  Competitive liquidity providers charge  spreads as a function of their expected losses to 
better informed traders.  Crucially, however, any loss e xperienced by a liquidity pr ovider is offset by an 
equal gain to the investor.  That is, losses to better informed trader s are a private cost to liquidity 
providers, but are not a net cost when aggregating acr oss all traders.  This implies that the competitive 
bid-ask spread is wider than the net social cost of completing trades.12   
Since the model incorporates no out-of-pocket costs to completing trades, it is efficient from an 
allocative perspective for the trad er to purchase (sell) any time ρ is positive (negative).  With a positive 
bid-ask spread the trader is dissuaded from trading in those cases where B < V* < A.   The constraint on 
                                                             
12 Glosten (1989) also observes that a zero‐expected‐profit condition that applies for each trade leads to 
inefficiencies when asymmetric information exists.   He considers the extent to which a market maker with a 
degree of monopoly power can improve efficiency, by using profits on some trades to subsidize losses on others.   
In contrast, we focus on competitive liquidity provision, as in an open limit order book. 


===== PAGE 19 =====

 
18 
  
spread widths increases a llocative efficiency and net IPO proceeds by facilitating efficient trades that 
would otherwise be dissuaded by a bid-ask spread wider than the social cost of completing trades.    
Proposition 2 indicates that net IPO proceeds can be enhanced by optimally constraining the 
spread.   However, narrowing the spread to arbitrary levels has the following implications: 
PROPOSITION 3: When P < 2/3, value is enhanced for all positive K narrower than the competitive 
spread.  When  P> 2/3, value is enhanced when  
ሺଷ௉ିଶሻሺுି௅ሻ
ଶି௉൏
ଶ௉ሺுି௅ሻ
ଶି௉ , but value is decreased when 
൑
ሺଷ௉ିଶሻሺுି௅ሻ
ଶି௉ .   
To illustrate Proposition 3, Figure 3 displays the increase in net proceeds for various constrained 
spreads and P, for P < 2/3.  Figure 4 displays co rresponding changes in net proceeds when P > 2/3, and 
Figure 5 combines the data to display changes in net proceeds from constraining spreads for the full range 
of P from 0 to 1.   
Figures 3 to 5 demonstrate that firm net proceed s are enhanced by constraining the spread for 
most parameter values.  However, two potentially surpri sing results are also illustrated.  First, the spread 
width that maximizes net proceeds is greater than  zero, even though the model incorporates no out-of-
pocket cost to complete trades.   Second, net proceeds can be decreased rather than enhanced if the spread 
is constrained too tightly when there is a sufficiently high probability of informed trading, P.   

===== PAGE 20 =====

 
19 
  
 
Figure 3 Enhanced Firm Net Proceeds with the constrained spread normalized by the zero-profit 
competitive spread with P ranging from 0 to 2/3. 
 
Figure 4 Enhanced Firm Net Proceeds with the constrained spread normalized by the zero-profit 
competitive spread with P ranging from 2/3 to 1. 
 


===== PAGE 21 =====

 
20 
  
 
Figure 5 Enhanced Firm Net Proceeds with the constrained spread normalized by the zero-profit 
competitive spread with P ranging from 0 to 1. 
It may be surprising that value can be decreased by the combination of a high probability of 
informed trading and narrow bid-ask ask spreads, given that the investor benefits from each.  In fact, 
Lemma 2 above shows that the firm’s IPO proceeds strictly increase with P for any K, and Proposition 1 
shows that the firm’s IPO proceeds increase as the sp read width is further constrained, for any P.  
However, to enhance value the gain s to the trader must exceed the co sts imposed on the market maker, 
and in some cases they do not.    
To understand these results, consider again colu mn (x) of Table 2, which summarizes ex post 
gains aggregated across the investor, firm, and market  maker.   These gains depend on the investor’s buy-
sell decisions and outcomes on the liquidity shock parameter, ρ.  Trading gains across all parties would be 
maximized if the trader would buy for any realization of ρ ൐0  and would sell for any realization of 	ρ ൏
0.   Such an outcome would imply perfect allocative efficiency, in the sense that an additional share 
would flow to the trader if she valued it more highly than the market maker (for whom ρ ൌ0 ሻ, while the 
share would be transferred to the market maker if he valued it more highly than the trader. 
 However, perfect allocative efficiency is not obta ined in this setting, due both to the existence of 
the spread and the fact that trade prices differ from the true asset value known to informed traders.  


===== PAGE 22 =====

 
21 
  
Constraining the spread potentially improves alloca tive efficiency by allowing trades to occur that 
otherwise would not.   However, allocative efficiency  can be compromised by constraining the spread, by 
encouraging trades by informed traders in the “wrong” direction.13     
Referring to column (x) of Table 2, the unconditional expectation of the combined gains from t=1 
trading can be expressed as:  
Combined	Gain	from	Trading		ሺCGTሻ ൌ 
ሻ ∗E ሺρሻ ∗E ሺെρሻ.                                                    (5) 
Incorporating the distributional assumption on ρ, the unconditional expectation of the combined gains 
from trade depends on K according to: 
ൌ
௉ିଶ
଼ሺுି௅ሻଶ ൅
௉
ସ൅
ሺுି௅ሻି௉ሺுି௅ሻ
ସ .                    (6) 
We can now state the following.                                                                                
PROPOSION 4:   The spread constraint that maximizes the combined gain from trading is that which 
maximizes firm net proceeds. 
Comparing expression (6) for gains from trade to expression (4) for the firm’s proceeds net of the 
payment to market makers and expression (1) for the trader’s reservation utility from trading the Treasury 
security, implies FNP = µ௧௕௜௟௟ .  The firm captures as net proceeds the unconditional expected 
value of the asset, µ, plus the expected combined gains from t=1 trading, less the reservation utility 
available if the trader purchases the Treasury security instead of the IPO.   Since µ and ௧௕௜௟௟ are not 
affected by the secondary market spread, FNP and CGT are maximized simultaneously.   
                                                             
13 Trades in this model are always privately optimal.   Trades in the “wrong” direction occur because the market 
price of the asset differs from its true, non‐public, value.   A social planner with the goal of maximizing gains from 
trade might require all traders to transact in the “right” direction.  However, such a requirement would 
compromise price discovery, would require some form of coercion, and in any case is not induced via a maximum 
spread rule.  

===== PAGE 23 =====

 
22 
  
The effect of the spread constraint on the firm ’s proceeds and gains from trade can be understood 
by further assessing expression (5).  Tightening the spread constraint (decreasing K) decreases the ask and 
increases the bid.   Hence, the probability of a t=1 trad e strictly increases as the spread is constrained.   If 
the trader is uninformed, V*= μ + ρ, so V* exceeds A, giving rise to a buy, if and only if ρ > 0, while V* 
is less than B, giving rise to a sell, if and only if ρ < 0.   Narrowing the spread therefore always improves 
allocative efficiency when the trader is uninformed.   In contrast, trades need not improve allocative 
efficiency when the trader is informed.    
For an informed trader, V*= H + ρ when V = H, or V*= L + ρ when V = L.  Figure 6 illustrates 
informed trading outcomes in the former case; outco mes are symmetric when V = L.   Case 1 illustrated 
on Figure 6 incorporates the distributional assumption on ρ used to this point, i.e. that ρ is uniformly 
distributed on the interval -(H-L)/2 to (H-L)/2.  (Cases 2 and 3 will be discussed in Section 3.5.1 below). 
 
Figure 6: The effect of constraining the spread on informed trading when V=H.  In Case 1 ρ is 
uniformly distributed on the interval -(H-L)/2 to (H-L)/2.  In Case 2 ρ is normally distributed with mean 
zero.  In Case 3 ρ is uniformly distributed on the interval -(H-L) to (H-L). 
Narrowing the spread decreases A and increases B, each toward µ, as indicat ed by the arrows on 
Figure 6.  Given V = H and the Case 1 distributio nal assumption, the lower bound on the informed 


===== PAGE 24 =====

 
23 
  
trader’s subjective value, V*, is µ.  Therefore the d ecrease in the ask leads to a greater probability of an 
investor buy, while the increase in the bid does not affect the probability of a sale.  However, since A < H, 
the potential realizations on ρ that shift the informed trad er from no-trade to buy involve ρ < 0.   
Narrowing the spread therefore increa ses the probability of an informed  trader buy, but decreases the 
mean ρ conditional on a buy.  While the buy induced by a narrower spread is privately optimal for an 
informed trader (and contributes to price discovery, as discussed in Section 3.4.3), it reduces allocative 
efficiency, which in turn reduces gains from trade and the firm’s net proceeds. 
The spread constraint that maximizes the firm’s  net proceeds is that which maximizes expected 
allocative efficiency.  Constraining the spread to  the optimal level always enhances value, but 
constraining the spread to zero encourages too many informed trades that reduce allocative efficiency.    It 
is possible to reduce rather the net pr oceeds to the firm if the spread is  constrained too far in the presence 
of a large probability of informed trading.   
However, the preceding insight will be at least pa rtially mitigated in practice, for two reasons.  
First, the available empirical evidence indicates moderate rates of informed trading.  In particular, Easley, 
Kiefer, O’Hara, and Paperman (1996) introduce a model to estimate the probability of informed trading in 
U.S common stocks, reporting a cross-sectional average P estimate of about 0.20, and that the estimated P 
is less than 0.40 for virtually all stocks.  Our anal ysis indicates excessively constraining the spread can 
destroy rather than enhance value only when P appro aches one.  Further, our results regarding allocative 
efficiency stem in part from the fact that the m odel includes just a single round of trading.  A more 
complex model that allows for an offsetting trade afte r prices adjust to fully incorporate the informed 
traders’ information would alleviate the allocative inefficiency.  However, as long as trade prices differ 
from fundamental value (including the potential effect s of subsequent information shocks) the reductions 
in allocative efficiency due to info rmed trading will not be completely eliminated, and the optimal spread 
will not be zero. 

===== PAGE 25 =====

 
24 
  
3.4.3 Constrained Spreads and Price Discovery 
The preceding section shows that optimally constrai ning the spread leads to an increase in the 
IPO price that exceeds the cost of reimbursing liquidity  providers for their trading losses.  This comprises 
a major benefit from a DMM contract.  In addition,  the firm potentially benefits from improved price 
discovery.  We focus in particular on the mean squared forecast error (MSFE) when viewing the t=1 trade 
price as a forecast of the t=2 liquidation value, H or L.  Letting E 1(V) denote the expectation of 
liquidation value formed conditional on observing the time 1 trades, the MSFE is: 
MSFE ൌ Prob ሺVൌH ሻ ∗ሾ EଵሺV|VൌH ሻ െH ሿଶ ൅P r o bሺVൌL ሻ ∗ሾ EଵሺV|VൌL ሻ െL ሿଶ,    
where	the probabilities are unconditional.   In the Appendi x we assess these conditional expectations.  Let 
௟ and ௛ denote the mean squared forecast erro r with the competitive spreads, when ൏2 / 3  
and when ൒2 / 3  respectively.  These can be expressed as:  
௟ ൌ
ሺுି௅ሻమሺିସ௉యାଷ௉మାସ௉ିସሻమ
ସሺଶି௉ሻర , and ௛ ൌ
ሺுି௅ሻమሺଶି௉ሻమ
ଵ଺ . 
Let ௄ denote the mean squared forecast error when the spread width is constrained to K.  We have:  
௄ ൌ
ሺ௉మ௄మାଶሺுି௅ሻ൫ଶି௉ିଶ௉మ൯௄ାସ௉మሺுି௅ሻమሻమ
ଵ଺ሺଶுିଶ௅ିଶ௄ା௉∗௄ሻ మ . 
PROPOSITION 5: Constraining the bid-ask spread improves pr ice discovery, as the mean square forecast 
error (MSFE) of the time 1 trade price as a predictor of time 2 value is reduced.   
Figure 7 displays the difference between the M SFE with various constrained spreads and the 
MSFE with the zero-profit competitive spread for va rious constraints and probabilities of informed 
trading, and shows that the MSFE declines as the spread  is constrained, for K and all P.  The forecast 
error is reduced most when P is large, which reflects that the improvement in price discovery arises due to 
a narrower spread encouraging informed traders to trade on their information.  

===== PAGE 26 =====

 
25 
  
 
Figure 7: The effect of the constrained spread on the mean square forecast error, relative to the 
competitive benchmark.   
This analysis highlights the complex role of in formed trading in security  market equilibrium.  
Narrower spreads induce more outcomes where the in formed trader to is willing to purchase because 
V=H even though her liquidity shock is negative, and more outcomes where she is willing to sell because 
V = L, even though her liquidity shock is positive.  These additional trades are informative, and enhance 
price discovery.  On the other hand, the same tr ades reduce allocative effici ency, as discussed in the 
preceding section.  
3.5 Extensions   
We have shown that a contract between the firm and a DMM that calls for narrowing the 
secondary market bid-ask spread to less than competitive levels can benefit the firm in two ways.   First, it 
can increase the market value of the firm’s securities by more than th e required payment to the liquidity 
provider.   Second, by encouraging informed traders to  transact on their information, it can improve price 
discovery, such that the secondary market transaction price becomes a more reliable forecast of the final 
value of the firm’s assets.    


===== PAGE 27 =====

 
26 
  
However, our analysis to this point has relied on a particular distributional assumption regarding 
liquidity shocks, and on the assumption that the pr obability that the trader will become privately 
informed, P, is exogenous.  Further, while the dist ributional assumption used allows for closed form 
solutions, it allows for only limited insights regarding cr oss-sectional variation in the optimality of spread 
constraints.  We now consider the effects of relaxing these assumptions in various dimensions. 
3.5.1 Alternative Distributional Assumptions 
 The results presented in Section 3.4 relied on a specific distributional assumption regarding the 
investor’s subjective motive for trade, in particular that ρ is uniformly distributed on the interval -(H-L)/2 
to (H-L)/2.  This assumption is convenient, and allows  for a number of closed form solutions.  However, 
the actual distribution of motives for trade is unknow n, and a wide variety of alternative assumptions 
could potentially be evaluated.   Here, we briefly outline two alternatives that highlight the key features of 
possible alternative distributions, and argue that our central results are likely to be robust to reasonable 
alternative specifications.    
If the trader is uninformed, then for any symmetric distribution of ρ centered on zero, narrowing 
the spread will lead to more uninformed buys with positive ρ and more uninformed sells with negative ρ. 
For any such symmetric distribution narrower spreads lead to more uninformed trades.  This necessarily 
improves allocative efficiency, but also generates more noise for purposes of price discovery.   Similarly, 
narrower spreads will always generate more trades by in formed traders, for any symmetric distribution of 
ρ centered on zero.  However, the increased in formed trades do not necessarily improve allocative 
efficiency, and may or may not increase price discovery, depending on the distribution of ρ.   
Figure 6 illustrates outcomes on V*, the informed i nvestor’s subjective valuation of the security, 
and the informed trader’s trading decisions for two additional distributional assumptions.   In Case 2, ρ is 
distributed normally with mean zero.   In Case 3, ρ is uniformly distributed on the interval -(H-L) to (H-
L).   Figure 6 focuses on the case where V = H; results when V = L are symmetric.   

===== PAGE 28 =====

 
27 
  
The relevant attribute of the two new proba bility distributions, relative to the base case 
assumption, is that they each allow for outcomes on  V* (conditional on V = H) that are less than the 
unconditional  expected asset value, µ, while the b ase case did not.  As a consequence, narrowing the bid-
ask spread can lead to additional informed sales as well as purchases in Cases 2 and 3, while in the base 
case narrowing the spread could only lead to additi onal informed purchases.   In Case 2, outcomes on V* 
that are less than H but exceed µ ar e more likely than outcomes that ar e less than µ, implying that a 
symmetric narrowing of the spread will induce more a dditional purchases than sales.   In case 3 outcomes 
on V* that are less than H but exceed µ are equally likely as outcomes that are less than µ, implying that a 
symmetric narrowing of the spread will generate an equal number of additional sales as additional 
purchases.   
The key attribute of case 3 is that narrowing the sp read is equally likely to generate additional 
informed sales as additional purchases.   In contr ast, under the base case assumption constraining the 
spread was more likely to generate additional buys when value is high an d more sells when value is low.  
In case 3, price discovery is not e nhanced by constraining the spr ead, because an equal number of new 
buys and new sells are induced by the narrower spread , rendering the information content of buys versus 
sells unchanged.  By comparison, the improvement in  price discovery in the base case occurs because 
constraining the spread was more likely to induce cust omer buys (sells) when value is high (low).   
Further, in case 3, the constrained spread that maximizes the firm net proceeds is zero. 14  This result also 
reflects that constraining the spread is equally likely to induce new buys as to induce new sells in case 3.  
As a consequence, allocative efficiency in trad es stemming from informed traders does not decrease on 
average with a narrower spread in case 3, as it did under the base case assumptions.  The improved 
allocative efficiency associated with  increased trades by uninformed traders therefore leads to a value-
maximizing spread of zero in case 3.      
                                                             
14 Formal proofs of both Case 3 results cited in this paragraph are available from the authors on request.   

===== PAGE 29 =====

 
28 
  
Comparing case 3 to base case highlights that a key feature of any possible distributional 
assumption regarding liquidity shocks is whether small shocks (in particular those with absolute value 
less than (H-L)/2) are more likely than large shocks (in particular those with absolute value greater (H-
L)/2).   The base case involves zero probability of large shocks, while case 3 involves equal probabilities 
of large and small shocks.   While the actual distri bution of liquidity shocks is not observable, we 
consider probability distributions where small shocks are more likely than large to be more realistic.  This 
analysis indicates that our results that price discove ry is improved by narrowing the spread and that the 
optimal spread is non-zero can be overturned if large liquidity shocks are assumed to be as likely as small 
shocks, but that the results are likely to be robust to  other alternative distributional assumptions.    Note, 
though, that the key result that value is enhanced by constraining the spread survives even in case 3. 
Normally distributed shocks, as in case 2, comprise a particular intermediate assumption.  
Narrowing the spread (still conditional on V=H) increases sa les by informed traders, but to a lesser extent 
than it increases purchases by informed  traders.  As a consequence,  narrowing the spread in Case 2 
unambiguously improves price discovery, as it did under base case assumptions.      
Whether the constrained spread that maximizes fi rm net proceeds in Case 2 remains positive or is 
equal to zero depends also on the standard deviation of  liquidity shocks.    Narrowing the spread induces 
more purchases by informed traders with negative ρ than sales by informed traders with positive ρ, but the 
latter involve liquidity shocks of greater absolute  value.   In the following section we implement 
numerical searches and find optimal spreads that are non-zero, given normally distributed liquidity 
shocks.  
3.5.2 Cross-Sectional Variation in the Use of DMM Contracts   
 As noted, DMM contracts are used on a number of international stock markets.  Such contracts 
are typically not used for all stocks on the market, bu t tend to be concentrated in less liquid securities.   
Our analysis shows that the key characteristic that  allows a DMM contract to improve value is not 

===== PAGE 30 =====

 
29 
  
illiquidity per se, but illiquidity attributable to informa tion asymmetry.   However, the analysis in Section 
3.4 does not clarify why some firms refrain from entering DMM contracts. 
 To assess cross-sectional variation in the usage of DMM contracts requires alternative 
assumptions regarding the distribution of liquidity shocks, ρ.   In our baseline anal ysis, the distribution of 
ρ is linked to the fundamental uncertainty in asset va lue, H-L, which allowed for closed-form solutions 
that helped to illustrate the key economic reasons that  DMM contracts can enhance value.    However, to 
obtain cross-sectional insights requires assumptions that  break this linkage, as fundamental uncertainty is 
likely to vary across assets, while the distribution of li quidity shocks is more appropriately viewed as an 
investor characteristic that remains the same regardless of which asset is purchased.15      
 To assess cross-sectional variation in DMM contr act usage, we focus on a measure of relative 
uncertainty regarding asset value, R = (H-L)/(H+L) = (H-L)/2µ, which is absolute uncertainty scaled by  
expected asset value.  Higher re lative uncertainty would generally be  associated with smaller, younger, 
and more volatile firms.   While uncertainty regarding asset value differs across securities, we assume that 
liquidity shocks are drawn from the same distributi on, regardless of the asset purchase.  We focus in 
particular on liquidity shocks drawn from a zero-mean normal distribution.16    
Unlike the baseline analysis, wher e the expected payoff on both the risky and riskless securities 
equal µ, the cross-sectional analysis includes risky i nvestments that differ in scale.  This gives rise to a 
modified indifference condition for IPO participation.   In particular, the expected utility gain per unit of 
µ must be equal across all risky assets and equal to that  of the T-bill.  We continue to rely on expression 
(2) to describe investor utility, and appendix e xpressions A.III.1 and A.III.2 to define competitive 
equilibrium.   However, closed form solutions for the equilibrium offer price, the required payment to 
                                                             
15 Of course, in a more complex model with heterogeneous investors who differ in terms of the distribution of 
liquidity shocks it is possible that clientele effects could form.    
16 Results are based on a standard deviation of liquidity shocks equal to one.   More generally, model results depend 
on relative uncertainty in asset value as compared to the standard deviation of liquidity shocks.  We rely on the 
normal distribution here since closed form solutions are not available in any case, and a distribution where small 
liquidity shocks are more common than large seems more realistic as compared to the uniform distribution. 

===== PAGE 31 =====

 
30 
  
market makers and firm net proceeds are not available when the distribution of ρ is no longer linked to 
absolute uncertainty or when ρ is distributed normal rather than uniform.  We therefore implement 
numerical procedures, searching across constrained spreads ranging from the competitive spread to zero, 
in order to assess optimal firm-specific spread widths.     
 
 
Figure 8: (Panel A) Displays optimal spreads for vari ous probabilities of informed trading, P, and relative 
uncertainty regarding asset value, R.  Panel (B) disp lays the change in relative firm net proceeds for 
various probabilities of informed trading, P, and relative uncertainty regarding asset value, R.  
Figures 8A and 8B display the optimal constrained spread (relative to the zero profit spread) and 
the enhancement in firm net proceeds as a result of constraining the spread, for various probabilities of 
informed trading, P, and relative uncertainty regarding asset value, R.   The figures show that the optimal 
constrained spread is less than the competitive spread, and firm net proceeds are enhanced by constraining 
the spread, when relative uncertainty is high, and when the probability of informed trading is moderate.    
This result reflects the fact that the competitive sp read itself is wide for firms with high relative 
uncertainty, meaning that a higher proportion of tr aders are dissuaded from trading.   Narrowing the 
spread induces proportionately more trading by uninformed traders, whose trades always improve 


===== PAGE 32 =====

 
31 
  
allocative efficiency, when the spread is wider.   This leads to  improved allocative efficiency for firms 
with higher relative uncertainty and higher competitive spreads, unless the probability of informed trading 
is excessive.     
As noted, Easley, Kiefer, O’Hara, and Paperman (1996) report empirical estimates of informed 
trading probabilities that are less than 0.40 for virtually  all stocks.   These moderate estimates of P, in 
combination with our model results, imply that DMM c ontracts will indeed enhance value, for firms with 
large relatively uncertainty in asset value.   These will tend to be smaller and you nger firms.   This model 
implication accords with simple intuition and the em pirical observation that DMM contracts tend to be 
employed for less liquid firms (which tend to be younger and smaller).  However, we emphasize that the 
contracts enhance value by reducing externalities st emming from information asymmetries, not due to 
illiquidity attributable to non-informational sources. 
3.5.3 Model Outcomes with Endogenous Information Acquisition   
In section 3.4, we show that given an exogenous  probability that the trader becomes informed, 
firm net proceeds and price discovery can both be e nhanced by constraining the bid-ask spread to be 
narrower than the zero-profit spread.   We now relax the assumption of exogenous P, to reflect that traders 
can choose to invest in information.     We return in this analysis to the base case assumption that liquidity 
shocks are distributed uniform.   
We assume that P can be increased as the trader invests in information acquisition, according to a 
convex cost function ሻ ൌ
௉ൈ௖
ଵି௉, where c is a constant.   This implies that investors can improve the 
odds of becoming informed regarding true value, but th at the cost of doing so increases as more certainty 
is sought.   After paying ߟthe investor will learn the true t=2 value of the security with probability P.   
The investor benefits directly from higher P th rough better trading decisions.  In addition, we 
assume that the value of the firm’s assets is enha nced when P is increased, according to the concave 

===== PAGE 33 =====

 
32 
  
function ܲwhere b is a constant.  We do not model of the effect of P on the value of the 
firm’s assets, as this effect has been addressed in the extant literature, and our primary goal lies in 
assessing the effect of contracts that enhance liquidity supply.   The basic rationale is that, given more 
informative secondary market prices, the firm can ma ke superior investment and compensation decisions, 
as in Foucault and Fresard (2012), Tetlock and Hahn (2007), Holmstrom and Tirole (1993), Dow and 
Gorton (1997), and Subrahmanyam and Titman (1999), among others.    
The investor gains this benefit through owners hip of the firm’s equity, implying that the 
investor’s expected time zero payoff from initially investing in the risky security becomes ߨ=’.ߟ   
Note though, that since the IPO price is set to provi de the investor with only her reservation utility, the 
firm’s current owners ultimately capture all benefits (net of ߟfrom improved price discovery, in the form 
of a higher IPO price.  
For any given spread, the investor evaluates margin al costs and benefits to choose her optimal P, 
which we denote P*.   Since liquidity providers know th e investor’s costs and benefits, they can infer P*.  
In the absence of any constraint on spreads, liquidity  suppliers continue to choose zero-profit bid and ask 
quotes, on the basis of P*.  Similarly, the firm knows P*, and selects the offer price Q so that the 
participation constraint is met.  
The investor pays the security offer price, Q, befo re choosing P, implying that the offer price is a 
sunk cost at the time of the decision to invest in info rmation.   If the firm is committed to constraining the 
spread the investor knows the contracted spread width,  K, at the time she chooses P.  This creates an 
important asymmetry between constrained and unconstr ained outcomes.  In the absence of a constraint, 
increasing P leads to wider spreads, and the investor ta kes this effect into account.  However, with fixed 
K, increasing P does not widen spreads; it instead increases the side payment from the firm to the 
liquidity provider.  The trader therefore has stronger incentives to invest in increasing P with contractually 
fixed as compared to competitive spreads.    

===== PAGE 34 =====

 
33 
  
Let P*(K) denote the trader’s optimal P as a function of the constrained spread.  The 
corresponding payoff to the investor can be denoted ߨ′K, Q, P*(K)).  Equilibrium requires 
డగ’
డ௉ ൌ0  and 
ߨ’ െ
ሺுି௅ሻ
ସ  , where the former is the first order conditio n that reflects the informed trader’s optimal 
choice of P, and the latter is the investor’s particip ation constraint.    Unfo rtunately, these equilibrium 
expressions cannot be solved analytically.   
We instead assess numerical solutions.  Figur e 9 displays the gross investor payoff, ߨfor 
various P and K, based on parameters of H=2, L=1,  b=0.36, and c=0.03.  The optimal P that will be 
selected by the investor for any given K chosen by the firm can be assessed as the highest outcome on ߨ ’
for the given K.  As Figure 9 demonstrates, the invest or will select a higher P when the spread constraint, 
K, is tighter. 
Figure 10 displays with a solid blue line firm net proceeds (FNP) for various levels of the 
constrained spread, K, conditional on the investor’s optim al selection of  P*(K).   As when P was fixed, 
there is an interior optimum K* that maximizes firm  net proceeds.   Figure 10 also displays, with the 
dashed green line, the optimal P* that the investor would choose for different levels of the spread 
constraint, K.   As might be anticipated, P* d ecreases with K, because the marginal gain from being 
informed is increased if the cost of trading on the in formation is reduced.   However, the modest increase 
in P*, from about .785 when K = H-L to about .805 when K = 0 understates the importance of 
constraining the spread, relative to the outcome when the spread is endogenous. 
Figure 11 displays the sum of firm net proceed s, FNP, and fixed reservation utility, with the 
competitive spread, for various possible P.  Since the fi rm makes no payment to the market maker in this 
case, the firm’s net proceeds plus reservation utility is si mply the investor’s expected trading gains.   The 
investor chooses P after paying the IPO price, so as to  maximize this net gain.  Note that, in the absence 
of a payment to market makers, the competitive spread  will increase if the trader invests to increase P.  
This creates a disincentive to increas e P that is absent for any fixed K.  As Figure 11 shows, FNP plus 
reservation utility is maximized at P = 0.  That is, with competitive market making (and given the selected 

===== PAGE 35 =====

 
34 
  
parameters) the marginal costs of becoming informed exceed the marginal benefits, and the trader would 
choose to not invest in information.  The resulting FN P plus reservation utility is µ =1.5.  In contrast, as 
Figure 10 shows, given the same parameters the trad er chooses to become inform ed for any fixed spread 
up to H-L.  The implication is that constraining sp reads can induce the investor to become informed, 
thereby enhancing price discovery, in situations wh ere she would not choose to invest in information 
given competitive market making.     
 
Figure 9 The investor’s Gross Payoff with different level of constrained spread K and P. 
 
Figure 10 Maximum firm net proceeds at different level of constrained spread K with the optimal P*(K) 


===== PAGE 36 =====

 
35 
  
 
Figure 11 Firm net proceeds (equals to IPO price plus reservation utility) with competitive spread 
Figures 9 to 11 are based on a specific set of parameters, including H=2, L=1, b=0.36, and 
c=0.03.  Given these parameters, there exists an interi or optimum constrained spread that maximizes firm 
net proceeds, and the investor chooses to incur costs in order to become informed with a constrained 
spread, but not with a competitive spread.   
As might be anticipated, the results of this anal ysis are sensitive to the parameters employed, and 
in particular to the relative costs and benefits of information acquisition.  In Figure 12 we summarize 
outcomes when the benefit parameter is alternately in creased to b = 0.40 (Panel A) and decreased to b = 
0.30 (Panel B) while the cost parameter is held constant at c = 0.03.   
In Panel A, in the absence of a constraint on  spreads, FNP plus reservation utility reaches a 
maximum of about 1.518 with P of about 0.8.  In co ntrast, constraining spreads leads to net proceeds in 
excess of 1.52 for a wide range of constrained spreads.  Given these parameters, the trader would invest in 
information with or without a constraint on spreads,  but the firm would indeed choose to constrain the 
spreads to increase its net proceeds.    
On Panel B, in the absence of a c onstraint on spreads, the investor would choose to not invest in 
private information, leading to FNP plus reservation u tility of 1.5.  Constraining spreads would lead the 


===== PAGE 37 =====

 
36 
  
investor to invest to increase P, but FNP plus reserva tion utility are less than th e benchmark of 1.5 for all 
constrained spreads.  Hence, the reduction in the be nefit parameter induces the firm to not contract to 
narrow the spread, and as a consequence induces the trader to not invest in information. 
In Section 3.4 we showed that a constraint on sp read widths could always enhance value, given 
exogenous P.  Here, we show that when becoming info rmed requires costly private investment, value will 
be enhanced and the investor will be induced to incur expenses in or der to become informed, in those 
cases where the benefits of improved price discovery to th e firm are relatively larger.   To the extent that 
the benefits of more informativ e prices take the form of guida nce regarding upcoming investment 
decisions, we anticipate that firms with greater future  investment opportunities re lative to assets-in-place 
will be more likely to contract to constrain spreads.  These will tend to be young, growth firms.    
 
(a) Firm chooses to constrain spread when benefit is relatively high. (b=0.4, c=0.03) 
 
 


===== PAGE 38 =====

 
37 
  
 
(b) Firm chooses not to constrain spread when benefit is relatively low. (b=0.3, c=0.03) 
 
Figure 12 Equilibria with varying benefit parameters 
4. Conclusions and Implications 
We present a relatively simple model to assess the effects on firm value, gains from trade, and 
price discovery of a contract between a firm and a de signated liquidity supplier.  Our analysis shows that 
optimal contracted liquidity provision depends crucia lly on the amount of informed trading.  Contracts 
that narrow bid-ask spreads improve economic effici ency by inducing more uninformed investors to 
trade.   Narrower spreads also i nduce more informed investors to trade, which tends to improve price 
discovery.   However, more information-based trade has a cost, which is reduced allocative efficiency. 
The optimal contracted bid-ask spread will reflect a balance between these considerations.    
 Our analysis shows that the potential benefits of contracts that require enhanced liquidity supply 
are related to information, rather than illiquidity, per se.  The insight that seems to arise most often in 
contemporary discussion is that contracts for additional liquidity supply are needed for those firms or at 
those times when liquidity is scarce.   Our analysis does not support this view, to the extent that illiquidity 
is attributable to high real costs, e.g. the high  inventory costs associated with large volatility and/or 
infrequent trading.   Value will not be enhanced by contracts that reduce spreads below the real social 


===== PAGE 39 =====

 
38 
  
costs of market making.   Instead, our analysis impli es that efficiency and firm value can be enhanced for 
those firms or at those times when liquidity is sparse due to real or perceived information asymmetries.  
This result reflects that the asymmetric information costs of providing liquidity are zero sum transfers, not 
net social costs.   If, as Easley, Lopez de Prado, and O’Hara (2011) assert, liquidity is sometimes 
withdrawn from the market when perceived informati on asymmetries increase, our analysis implies that 
market quality and firm values will be enhanced by cont racts that require liquidity providers to remain in 
the market at those times.   
Our analysis is also relevant in assessing which firms would benefit from adopting a DMM 
agreement.  Liquidity enhancement will be more va luable, ceteris paribus, to those firms that would 
benefit more from improved price discovery to guid e real investment decisions.  Further, liquidity 
enhancement will be more valuable  to firms characterized by high uncertainty regarding asset value, 
relative to expected asset value.   These will also be firms that would tend to have wider spreads in 
competitive equilibrium.  In combination, our model im plies that contracts that constrain spread widths 
are value enhancing at firms that (1) are characteri zed by non-trivial information asymmetries, (2) are 
subject to relatively more uncertainty regarding funda mental asset values, and (3) are likely to make 
substantial capital investment decisions in the reasona bly near future.   These are likely to be smaller, 
younger, and growth-oriented firms, as opposed to larger firms with a high proportion of assets-in-place.  
The model presented here has a number of implicati ons for researchers and policy makers.   First, 
and most important, our analysis shows that market quality, economic efficiency , and firm value can be 
enhanced by contracts that require liquidity providers to provide more liquidity than they would otherwise 
choose.  In light of the absence of barriers to entry in providing liquidity in electronic limit order markets, 
it seems reasonable to assume the business of liquidity provision is competitive.  If so, side payments will 
be required to induce one or more designated market makers to take on such affirmative obligations, and 
our model implies that affirmative obligations to pr ovide liquidity should not be imposed in the absence 
of compensation to the DMMs.  Contracts of the t ype studied here, calling for a contract between the 

===== PAGE 40 =====

 
39 
  
listed firm and the DMM, are observed on some international markets, but are currently prohibited in U.S. 
markets by FINRA Rule 5250.  Our model shows that  the competitive bid-ask spread fails to maximize 
trader welfare or firm value, due to externa lities associated with information asymmetries.  DMM 
contracts of the type considered here comprise a potential market solution to a market imperfection. 
Some limitations of our analysis should be noted .  We focus exclusively on a requirement to 
maintain narrow spreads, and have not attempted to formally assess the optimal set of affirmative 
obligations.   Further, as our model focuses for simplicity on a single trader, a single round of trading, and 
trades of unit size, we have not considered potential effects of market maker affirmative obligations on 
trade timing, trade sizes, repeat trading, or trad ing aggressiveness, each of which provides useful 
possibilities for future research.    

===== PAGE 41 =====

 
40 
  
Appendix 
I. Investor Trading  
If the investor purchases the Treasury Bill or the risky security at time 0 she has the option to trade the 
same asset at time 1. After her purc hase of the asset and before her tr ading at T=1, she will experience a 
liquidity shock ρ~Uሺെ
ୌି୐
ଶ ,
ୌି୐
ଶ ሻ.  Observing the bid and ask quotes (B and A) at time 1, the investor 
buys if her private value exceeds the ask, sells if her private value is be low the bid, and does not trade if 
her subjective valuation lies between the bid and the ask. Her probability of buy, sell and no trade, and her 
expected payoff are assessed as follows.   
1) If the investor purchases the T-bill at time 0, she can buy, sell or not trade the T-bill at zero spread at 
its known price at time 1. That is ൌ
ுା௅
ଶ . Her private value of the T-bill is ∗ ൌ
ுା௅
ଶ∈
ሻ.  
ሻ ൌ
ுି஺
ுି௅ ൌ0.5     (A.I.1) 
ሻ ൌ
஻ି௅
ுି௅=0.5     (A.I.2) 
ሻ ൌ
஺ି஻
ுି௅=0     (A.I.3) 
ሿ ൌ
ுା஺
ଶ ൌ
ଷுା௅
ସ      (A.I.4) 
ሿ ൌ
஻ା௅
ଶ ൌ
ுାଷ௅
ସ      (A.I.5) 
ሿ ൌ
ுା௅
ଶ 				  (A.I.6) 
 
AൌBൌ 	
ܮ
2 				
ሻ 									
ܤ
ܣ
ܪ 
ܮ 

===== PAGE 42 =====

 
41 
  
 
2) If the investor purchases the risky security’s IPO sh are at time 0, she will ha ve a probability of P to 
become informed and she can buy, sell or not trade the risky security at (A, B). If the investor remains 
uninformed, her expected value of the security is  EሺVሻ ൌ
ୌା୐
ଶ  and her private value of the security 
is	V∗ ൌ
ୌା୐
ଶ ൅ρ∈ሺ L ,H ሻ .  
ሻ ൌ
ுି஺
ுି௅    (A.I.7) 
ሻ ൌ
஻ି௅
ுି௅  (A.I.8)  
ሻ ൌ
஺ି஻
ுି௅  (A.I.9) 
ሿ ൌ
ுା஺
ଶ     (A.I.10)    
 ሿ ൌ
஻ା௅
ଶ      (A.I.11) 
 ሿ ൌ
஺ା஻
ଶ     (A.I.12) 
If the investor becomes informed and learns that the true value of the security is V=H, then her private 
value of the security is V∗ ൌH൅ ρ	∈ሺ
ୌା୐
ଶ ,H൅
ୌି୐
ଶ ሻ. 
ሻ ൌ
ுାಹషಽ
మ ି஺
ுି௅   (A.I.13) 
ሻ ൌ0    (A.I.14) 
ሻ ൌ
஺ିಹశಽ
మ
ுି௅     (A.I.15) 
ሿ ൌ
ுାಹషಽ
మ ା஺
ଶ  (A.I.16) 
ሿ ൌ0 ,     ݒ׬ 
஻
ሻ ൌ0 ሻ (A.I.17) 
ሻ ൌ
ܮ
2 			
H
L
A
B
ሻ 		 					
ܤ
ܣ

===== PAGE 43 =====

 
42 
  
ሿ ൌ
஺ାಹశಽ
మ
ଶݒ׬ 
஺
ݒ׬ 
஺
ಹశಽ
మ
ሻ ൌ
ሻሻ          ( A . I . 1 8 )  
 
Correspondingly, if the investor become s informed learns that the true va lue of the security is V=L, then  
her private value of the security is V∗ ൌL൅ρ∈ ቀLെ
ୌି୐
ଶ ,
ୌା୐
ଶ ቁ.  
ሻ ൌ0 	  (A.I.19) 
ሻ ൌ
஻ି௅ାಹషಽ
మ
ுି௅  (A.I.20) 
ሻ ൌ
ಹశಽ
మ ି஻
ுି௅  (A.I.21) 
 
ݒ׬ 
ு
ሻ ൌ0 ሻ 	  (A.I.22) 
ሿ ൌ
஻ା௅ିಹషಽ
మ
ଶ          (A.I.23) 
ሿ ൌ
஻ାಹశಽ
మ
ଶݒ׬ 
஺
ݒ׬ 
ಹశಽ
మ
ሻ ൌ
ሻሻ	         (A.I.24) 
  
 


===== PAGE 44 =====

 
43 
  
II. Bayesian Updating Based on the Observed Order (Buy, Sell, No Trade) 
 
The market maker updates the conditional asset value on the basis of observed order using Bayes’ Rule. 
The bid and ask quotes and the trader’s decision are endogenously determined, as a lower ask implies a 
higher probability of buy order and a higher bid implies a high probability of sell order.  
 
Given the probability of a buy conditional on the ask quot e, the arrival of an informed trader with true 
value being high (or low) in eq. (A.I.13) (or in eq . (A.I.19)) and the probability of a buy conditional on 
the arrival of an uninformed trader in eq. (A.I.7), the probability of a buy order conditional on asset value 
can be stated as: 
 
ሻ   (A.II.1) 
 
ሻ     (A.II.2) 
 
where P is the probability that the trader is informed. Upon observing a buy order, the market maker uses 
Bayes’ Rule to update probabilities regarding the true asset value: 
 
ሻ ൌ
௉௥௢௕ሺ௏∗வ஺|௏ୀுሻ∗௉௥௢௕ሺ௏ୀுሻ
௉௥௢௕ሺ௏∗வ஺|௏ୀுሻ∗௉௥௢௕ሺ௏ୀுሻା௉௥௢௕ሺ௏∗வ஺|௏ୀ௅ሻ∗௉௥௢௕ሺ௏ୀ௅ሻ   (A.II.3) 
ሻ ൌ
௉௥௢௕ሺ௏∗வ஺|௏ୀ௅ሻ∗௉௥௢௕ሺ௏ୀ௅ሻ
௉௥௢௕ሺ௏∗வ஺|௏ୀுሻ∗௉௥௢௕ሺ௏ୀுሻା௉௥௢௕ሺ௏∗வ஺|௏ୀ௅ሻ∗௉௥௢௕ሺ௏ୀ௅ሻ    (A.II.4) 
 
Conditional on observing a buy, the expected value of V is: 
ሻ         (A.II.5) 
 

===== PAGE 45 =====

 
44 
  
 
When value is high (or low) and the trader is inform ed, the probability of a sell is given by eq. (A.I.14) 
(or by eq. (A.I.20)).   If the trader is uninformed, the probability of a sell is in eq. (A.I.8).  Therefore, the 
probabilities of observing a sell are given as:  
ሻ   (A.II.6)  
ሻ  (A.II.7) 
where P is the probability that the trader is informed . Upon observing a sell order, the market maker uses 
Bayes Rule to update probabilities regarding the true asset value: 
ሻ ൌ
௉௥௢௕ሺ௏∗ழ஻|௏ୀுሻ∗௉௥௢௕ሺ௏ୀுሻ
௉௥௢௕ሺ௏∗ழ஻|௏ୀுሻ∗௉௥௢௕ሺ௏ୀுሻା௉௥௢௕ሺ௏∗ழ஻|௏ୀ௅ሻ∗௉௥௢௕ሺ௏ୀ௅ሻ   (A.II.8) 
ሻ ൌ
௉௥௢௕ሺ௏∗ழ஻|௏ୀ௅ሻ∗௉௥௢௕ሺ௏ୀ௅ሻ
௉௥௢௕ሺ௏∗ழ஻|௏ୀுሻ∗௉௥௢௕ሺ௏ୀுሻା௉௥௢௕ሺ௏∗ழ஻|௏ୀ௅ሻ∗௉௥௢௕ሺ௏ୀ௅ሻ   (A.II.9) 
Conditional on a sell, the market maker updates the expected value of V as:   
ሻ.                 (A.II.10) 
 
The absence of a trade is also potenti ally informative regarding firm valu e.  If the trader is informed, the 
probability of no trade is given by eq. (A.I.15) when  V=H and eq. (A.I 21) when V=L.  If the trader is 
uninformed, the probability of no trade is given by in eq. (A.I.9).  Therefore, conditional no-trade 
probabilities are:   
 
ܸ
ሻ			
          (A.II.11)  

===== PAGE 46 =====

 
45 
  
and 
ሻ 
                      (A.II.12) 
And probabilities regarding asset values conditional on no trade are given as:   
ሻ ൌ
௉௥௢௕ሺ஺வ௏∗வ஻|௏ୀுሻ∗௉௥௢௕ሺ௏ୀுሻ
௉௥௢௕ሺ஺வ௏∗வ஻|௏ୀுሻ∗௉௥௢௕ሺ௏ୀுሻା௉௥௢௕ሺ஺வ௏∗வ஻|௏ୀ௅ሻ∗௉௥௢௕ሺ௏ୀ௅ሻ            (A.II.13) 
ሻ ൌ
௉௥௢௕ሺ஺வ௏∗வ஻|௏ୀ௅ሻ∗௉௥௢௕ሺ௏ୀ௅ሻ
௉௥௢௕ሺ஺வ௏∗வ஻|௏ୀுሻ∗௉௥௢௕ሺ௏ୀுሻା௉௥௢௕ሺ஺வ௏∗வ஻|௏ୀ௅ሻ∗௉௥௢௕ሺ௏ୀ௅ሻ            (A.II.14) 
Conditional on the no-trade outcome, the market ma ker will update the expected value of V as the 
following: 
ሻ            (A.II.15) 
 
With a given spread, the unconditional probabilities of a buy, sell, and no trade are:  
ሻ               (A.II.16) 
ሻ                (A.II.17) 
ሻ         (A.II.18) 
 
where ሻ, ሻ,ሻ,  
ሻ, and ሻ   are given in eq. (A.II.1), (A.II.6), (A.II.11) , 
(A.II.2), (A.II. 7). and (A.II.12). 
 
 
III. Proof of Lemmas and Propositions 

===== PAGE 47 =====

 
46 
  
Proof of Lemma 1:  We determine the competitive bid and ask quotes based on a zero-expected profit 
condition, similar to Glosten and Milgrom (1985).  The market maker sets the zero profit ask price (A) to 
the conditional expected value based on a buy and the zero profit bid price (B) to the conditional expected 
value based on a sell as the followings:  
ሻ          (A.III.1)  
and  
ൌE ሺV|V∗ ൏B ሻ,          (A.III.2)  
where ሻ and  EሺV|V∗ ൏B ሻ are given in eq. (A.II.5) and eq. (A.II.10). Given the distributional 
assumption of the liquidity shock ρ~U ቀെ
ୌି୐
ଶ ,
ୌି୐
ଶ ቁ,   ProbሺV ൌ Lሻ = 	ProbሺV ൌ Hሻ =0.5, and the 
exogenous P, the competitive bid and ask  price can be obtained by solving ሻ and 
ൌE ሺV|V∗ ൏B ሻ respectively,  
 
For P less than 2/3: 
The competitive ask price ൌ 	
଴.ହ∗ሺ௉∗ுାଶுାଶ௅ିଷ௉∗௅ሻ
ଶି௉               
The competitive ask price ൌ 	
଴.ହ∗ሺ௉∗௅ାଶுାଶ௅ିଷ௉∗ு ሻ
ଶି௉        
  
For P greater than or equal to 2/3: 
The competitive ask price ܪ            
The competitive ask price ܮ          
 
Following section 3.3 table 2, from the viewpoint of the investor, the unconditional expectation of the 
investor’s net gain from participating in the IPO(column iii), given time 1 trading, can be written as: 
ሻ ሿ   + 
൧    + ሿ.                                                            

===== PAGE 48 =====

 
47 
  
As noted, the investor becomes info rmed regarding the final value of the asset, prior to time 1 trading, 
with probability P.   Differentia ting between the case where the investor is informed or not, the 
unconditional expectation as of time zero of the net gain can be expressed as:  
                                                                                                    
ሻ ሿ        
     ሿ  
     ሿ 	 ሽ  
     
ሻ ሿ     
  ሿ  
  ሿ	ሽ		    
                
   ሻ ሿ        
   ሿ 	 
        ሿ 	 ሽ 	 	 .  
 
where the conditional probabilitiesሻ, ሻ, and ሻ are 
given in eq. (A.I.7), (A.I.8) and (A.I.9).ሻ , ሻ , and 
ሻ  are given in eq. (A.I.13) , (A.I.14) and (A.I.15). ሻ , 
ሻ, and ሻ is given in eq. (A.I.19), (A.I.20) and (A.I.21) 
respectively. The conditiona l expected private values ሻ and ሻ	are 
given in (A.I.10) and (A.I.12). ሻ,	  ሻ 	 , 
ሻ, and  ሻ 	 are given in eq. (A.I.16), (A.I.18) ,(A.I.22) 
and  (A.I.24) respectively.  
 

===== PAGE 49 =====

 
48 
  
The firm’s equilibrium initial offer price Q can be derived from the participation constraint of the 
investor. To induce the investor to participate,  the firm chooses Q so that the expected payoff ߨequals 
௧௕௜௟௟.   
 
When P<2/3, given the zero profit bid and ask spread s, the firm will set the offer price of the risky 
security as௟ ൌ µ െ
௉ሺுି௅ሻ
ସ . When P>2/3, given the zero profit bid and ask spreads, the firm will set the 
offer price of the risky security as ௛ ൌ µ െ
ሺଶି௉ሻሺுି௅ሻ
଼ .      ■ 
 
 
 
Proof of Proposition 1: When ൑
ଶ
ଷ, ൌ
ሺଶି௉ሻ
଼ሺுି௅ሻଶ െ
௄
ଶ ൅
௉ሺுି௅ሻ
ଶ .   Then,  
 
ப୕ేି୕
ப୏ ൌ
୏ሺଶି୔ሻ
ସሺୌି୐ሻ െ
ଵ
ଶ ൏
మౌሺౄషైሻ
మషౌ ሺଶି୔ሻ
ସሺୌି୐ሻ െ
ଵ
ଶ ൌ
ଵ
ଶ
ሺP െ 1ሻ ൏ 0,	  
where the first inequality makes use of the fact that 		K ൏
ଶ୔ሺୌି୐ሻ
ଶି୔ , i.e. that the constrained spread is less 
than the unconstrained spread. 
When ൒
ଶ
ଷ,   ൌ
ሺଶି௉ሻ
଼ሺுି௅ሻଶ െ
௄
ଶ ൅
ሺଶା௉ሻ∗ሺுି௅ሻ
଼ .		Then,	
 
ப୕ేି୕
ப୏ ൌ
୏ሺଶି୔ሻ
ସሺୌି୐ሻ െ
ଵ
ଶ
൏
ሺୌି୐ሻሺଶି୔ሻ
ସሺୌି୐ሻ െ
ଵ
ଶ
൑
ଶିమ
య
ସ െ
ଵ
ଶ ൌെ
ଵ
଺
൏0 ,  
where the first inequality makes use of the fact that ,ܮ i.e. that the constrained spread is less than 
the unconstrained spread.          ■ 
 
 
Proof of Lemma 3: Given any quote (A, B), the liquidity provid er’s unconditional expectation of market 
making loss can be stated as: 
ሻሿ      

===== PAGE 50 =====

 
49 
  
Where ሻ  and ሻ  are given in eq. (A.II.16) and (A.II.17) respectively. 
ሻ	are given in eq. (A.II.5) and (A.II.10) respectively. 
 
By definition, the market maker’s loss is  zero with the competitive spread, where ሻ	and 
ሻ.   When the spread is constrained to K, such that ൌ
ுା௅
ଶ ൅
௄
ଶ	and ൌ
ுା௅
ଶ െ
௄
ଶ	, the 
liquidity provider’s expected market making loss, M,  which also equals the requisite payment from the 
firm to the market makers, is given as: 
ൌ
ሺଶି௉ሻ
ସሺுି௅ሻଶ െ
ሺଶା௉ሻ
ସ൅
௉ሺுି௅ሻ
ଶ . 
The derivative with respect to the spread constraint K is  
డெ
డ௄ ൌ
ሺுି௅ሻሺ௉ାଶሻିଶ௄ሺଶି௉ሻ
ିସሺுି௅ሻ . 
When ൑
ଶ
ଷ,  
ப୑
ப୏ ൏
ሺୌି୐ሻሺ୔ାଶሻିଶమౌሺౄషైሻ
మషౌ ሺଶି୔ሻ
ିସሺୌି୐ሻ ൌ
ሺଶିଷ୔ሻሺୌି୐ሻ
ିସሺୌି୐ሻ ൑0 , where the first inequality follows from 
the fact that K൏
ଶ୔ሺୌି୐ሻ
ଶି୔ , i.e. that the constrained spread is less than the competitive spread. 
When ൒
ଶ
ଷ,	
ப୑
ப୏ ൏
ሺୌି୐ሻሺ୔ାଶሻିଶሺୌି୐ሻሺଶି୔ሻ
ିସሺୌି୐ሻ ൌ
ଷ୔ିଶ
ିସ ൑0 , where the first inequality follows from the fact 
that K൑HെL , i.e. that the constrained spread is less than the competitive spread. 
 
 
 
Proof of Proposition 2:  The derivative of the firm’s net proceeds with respect to K is: 
பሺ୕ేି୔ሻ
ப୏ ൌ
	
୔ሺୌି୐ሻି୏ሺଶି୔ሻ
ସሺୌି୐ሻ . Setting this first order condition to zero and so lving for K, we obtain the optimal spread  
K∗ ൌ
୔ሺୌି୐ሻ
ଶି୔ .  Substituting the expression for K* into the e xpressions for the change in firm net proceeds, 
we have: 
When P<2/3, ൌ
௉మ∗ሺுି௅ሻ
଼∗ሺଶି௉ሻ ൒0 , and  

===== PAGE 51 =====

 
50 
  
when P>2/3,  ൌ
ሺଵି௉ሻమ∗ሺுି௅ሻ
ଶ∗ሺଶି௉ሻ ൒0 .       ■ 
	
Proof of Proposition 3: When ൑
ଶ
ଷ, ൌെ
ሺଶି௉ሻ
଼ሺுି௅ሻଶ ൅
௉
ସቀ
௉
ସ െ
ሺଶି௉ሻ
଼ሺுି௅ሻቁ ൐
ቀ
௉
ସ െ
ሺଶି௉ሻ
଼ሺுି௅ሻ
௉ሺுି௅ሻ
ଶି௉ 	ቁ ൌ0   ; where the inequality follows from the fact that ൏
ଶ௉ሺுି௅ሻ
ଶି௉ , i.e. that the 
constrained spread is less than the competitive spread. 
When൒ 2/3 , ൌെ
ሺଶି௉ሻ
଼ሺுି௅ሻଶ ൅
௉
ସ൅
ሺுି௅ሻሺଶିଷ௉ሻ
଼  .   
That isܯ0 when െ
௉ሺுି௅ሻ
ଶି௉ ቚ ൏
ଶሺଵି௉ሻሺுି௅ሻ
ଶି௉  .  
Therefore, if  
ሺଷ௉ିଶሻሺுି௅ሻ
ଶି௉൏
ଶ௉ሺுି௅ሻ
ଶି௉ , then ൐0 .    
If ൑
ሺଷ௉ିଶሻሺுି௅ሻ
ଶି௉ , then ൑0 .       ■ 
IV. Combined Gains from Trade  
                     
Referring to column (x) of Table 2 in section 3.3, the unconditional expectation of the combined gains 
from t=1 trading can be expressed as: 
ሻ
ሻ 
As noted, the investor becomes info rmed regarding the final value of the asset, prior to time 1 trading, 
with probability P.   Differentia ting between the case where the investor is informed or not, the 
unconditional expectation of the combined gains can be expressed as:  
ሻሿ    

===== PAGE 52 =====

 
51 
  
      ሻ ሿ 	 ሽ  
     
ሿ     
  ሿ 	 ሽ 	 	   
                
   ሿ        	 
     ሿ 	 ሽ 	 	 .  
 
Where the conditional probabilities ܸ
ሻ and ሻ are given in eq. (A.I.7) and 
(A.I.8).ሻ  and ሻ  are given in eq. (A.I.13) and (A.I.14). 
ሻ  and ሻ  are given in eq. (A.I.19) and (A.I.20). The 
conditional expected private values ሻ, ሻ,	 ሻ 
are given in eq. (A.I.10). (A.I.16) and (A.I.22).  ሻ,  ሻ,	 
ሻ are given in eq. (A.I.11). (A.I.17) and (A.I.23). 
 
Given the distributional assumption of the liquidity shock ρ~U ቀെ
ୌି୐
ଶ ,
ୌି୐
ଶ ቁ, the combined gain from 
trade with the constrained spread, K, can be further simplified to: ൌ
௉ିଶ
଼ሺுି௅ሻଶ ൅
௉
ସ൅
ሺுି௅ሻି௉ሺுି௅ሻ
ସ .                         
  

===== PAGE 53 =====

 
52 
  
References 
Angel, James J., Lawrence Harris, and Chester S. Spatt, 2011, Equity trading in the 21st century, 
Quarterly Journal of Finance 1, 1-53. 
Amihud, Y., and H. Mendelson, 1986, A sset pricing and the bid-ask spread, Journal of Financial 
Economics, 17, 223-249. 
Anand, Amber, and Daniel G. Weaver, 2006, The value of the specialist: Empirical evidence from the 
CBOE, Journal of Financial Markets 9, 100-118. 
Anand, Anand, Carsten Tanggaard, and Daniel G. Weaver, 2009, Paying for market quality, Journal of 
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 44, 1427-1457. 
Arnuk, S., Saluzzi, J. and R. Leuchtkafer, 2011, Comment: Algo Bots could cause another flash crash, 
Financial Times, May 5, 2011.  
Biais, B., T. Foucault, and S. Moinas, 2012, Equ ilibrium high frequency trading, working paper, 
Toulouse School of Economics. 
Biais, B., 1993, Price formation and equilibrium li quidity in fragmented and centralized markets, Journal 
of Finance 48, 157-185. 
Brogaard, Jonathan A., 2010, High frequency trading and its impact on market quality, working paper, 
University of Washington. 
Charitou, Andreas, and Marios A. Panayides, 2009, Market Making in International Capital Markets: 
Challenges and Benefits of Its Implementation in Emerging Markets, International Journal of Managerial 
Finance: Special Issue on International Market Microstructure 5, 50-80. 
Demsetz, Harold, 1968, The cost of transacting, Quarterly Journal of Economics 82, 33-53. 
Dow, James, and Gorton, Gary, 1997,  Stock Market  Efficiency and Economic Efficiency: Is There a 
Connection?, Journal of Finance 52, 1087-1129. 
Easley, D., N. Kiefer, M. O’Hara, and J. Paperman, 1996, Liquidity, information, and infrequently traded 
stocks, Journal of Finance 51, 1405-1436. 
Easley, D., M. M. Lopez de Prado, and M. O’Hara, 2011, The microstructure of the flash crash: Flow 
toxicity, liquidity crashes, and the probability of informed trading, Journal of Portfolio Management  37, 
118-128. 
Foucault, T., O. Kadan, and E. Kandel, 2005, Limit order book as a market for liquidity, Review of 
Financial Studies 18, 1171-1217 
Foucault, T., O. Kadan, and E. Kandel, 2012, Liquid ity cycles and make/take fees in electronic markets, 
Journal of Finance, forthcoming. 
Foucault, T. and L. Fresard, 2012, Cross-Listing, In vestment Sensitivity to Stock Price and the Learning 
Hypothesis, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming. 
Goettler, R., C. Parlour, and U. Rajan, 2005,  Equilibrium in a dynamic limit order market, Journal of 
Finance, 60, 2149-92.  

===== PAGE 54 =====

 
53 
  
Glosten, Lawrence R., and Paul R. Milgrom, 1985, Bi d, ask, and transaction prices in a specialist market 
with heterogeneously informed traders, Journal of Financial Economics 14, 71-100. 
Glosten, Lawrence R., 1989, Insider trading, liquidity, and the role of the monopolist specialist, Journal 
of Business 62, 211-235. 
Hollifield, Burton, Robert Miller, Patrik Sandas, and Joshua Slive, 2007, Estimating the Gains from Trade 
in Limit Order Markets, Journal of Finance 61, 2753-2804.  
Holmstrom, Bengt, and Jean Tirole, 1993, Market liquidity and performance monitoring, Journal of 
Political Economy 101, 678-709. 
Ho, Thomas S.Y., and Hans R. Stoll, 1980, On dealer markets under competition, Journal of Finance 35, 
259-267. 
Kirilenko, A., Kyle, A., Samadi, M., and T. Tuzan, 2011, The flash crash, the impact of high frequency 
trading on an electronic market, United States Commodity Futures Trading Commission, working paper. 
Menkveld, A. 2012, High Frequency Trading and the New Market Makers , VU Amsterdam working 
paper. 
Menkveld, A., and T. Wang, 2009, How do designated ma rket makers create valu e for small-cap stocks? 
VU Amsterdam working paper. 
Petrella, Giovanni, and Mahendrar ajah Nimalendran, 2003, Do thinly-traded stocks benefit from 
specialist intervention? Journal of Banking and Finance 27, 1823-1854. 
Sabourin, Delphine, 2006, Are designa ted market makers necessary in centralized limit order markets? 
Working paper, Université Paris IX Dauphine. 
Skjeltorp, Johannes A. and Bernt A. Odegaard, 2011, Why do firms pay for market making in their own 
stock?, Norges Bank working paper. 
Subrahmanyam, Avanidhar, and Sheridan Titman, 1999, The going-public decision and the development 
of financial markets, Journal of Finance 54, 1045-1082. 
Tetlock, Paul C., and Robert W. Hahn, 2007, Optim al liquidity provision for decision makers, Working 
paper, Columbia University. 
Venkataraman, Kumar, and Andrew C. Waisburd, 2007, The value of the designated market maker, 
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 42, 735-758. 