

===== PAGE 1 =====

American Economic Review 2020, 110(3): 677–719 
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20171201
677
Dominant Currency Paradigm†
By Gita Gopinath, Emine Boz, Camila Casas, Federico J. Díez,  
 Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, and Mikkel  Plagborg-Møller*
We propose a “dominant currency paradigm” with three key fea-
tures: dominant currency pricing, pricing complementarities, 
and imported inputs in production. We test this paradigm using a 
new dataset of bilateral price and volume indices for more than 
2,500 country pairs that covers 91 percent of world trade, as well 
as detailed  firm-product-country data for Colombian exports 
and imports. In strong support of the paradigm we find that (i) 
 noncommodities terms-of-trade are uncorrelated with exchange 
rates; (ii) the dollar exchange rate quantitatively dominates the 
bilateral exchange rate in price  pass-through and trade elastic-
ity regressions, and this effect is increasing in the share of imports 
invoiced in dollars; (iii) US import volumes are significantly less 
sensitive to bilateral exchange rates, compared to other countries’ 
imports; (iv) a 1 percent US dollar appreciation against all other 
currencies predicts a 0.6 percent decline within a year in the volume 
of total trade between countries in the rest of the world, controlling 
for the global business cycle. We characterize the transmission of, 
and spillovers from, monetary policy shocks in this environment.  
(JEL E52, F14, F31, F44)
Nominal exchange rates have always been at the center of fierce economic 
and political debates on spillovers, currency wars, and competitiveness. It is easy 
to understand why: in the presence of price rigidities, nominal exchange rate 
 fluctuations are associated with fluctuations in relative prices and therefore have 
consequences for real variables such as the trade balance, consumption, and output.
* Gopinath: Department of Economics, Harvard University (email: gopinath@harvard.edu); Boz: International 
Monetary Fund (email: eboz@imf.org); Casas: Banco de la República (email: mcasaslo@banrep.gov.co); Díez: 
International Monetary Fund (email: FDiez@imf.org); Gourinchas: Department of Economics, University of 
California-Berkeley (email: pog@berkeley.edu); Plagborg-Møller: Department of Economics, Princeton University 
(email: mikkelpm@princeton.edu). John Leahy was the coeditor for this article. This paper combines two papers: 
Casas et al. (2016) and Boz, Gopinath, and Plagborg-Møller (2017). We thank Isaiah Andrews, Richard Baldwin, 
Gary Chamberlain, Michael Devereux, Charles Engel, Christopher Erceg, Doireann Fitzgerald, Jordi Galí, Michal 
Kolesár, Philip Lane, Francis Kramarz, Brent Neiman, Maury Obstfeld, Jonathan Ostry, Ken Rogoff, Arlene Wong, 
and seminar participants at several venues for useful comments. We thank Omar Barbiero, Vu Chau, Tiago Flórido, 
Evgenia Pugacheva, Jianlin Wang for excellent research assistance and Enrique Montes and his team at the Banco 
de la República for their help with the data. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not 
necessarily represent those of the IMF, its Executive Board, or management, nor those of the Banco de la República 
or its Board of Directors. Gopinath acknowledges that this material is based on work supported by the NSF under 
grants 1061954 and 1628874. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this mate-
rial are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the NSF. All remaining errors are our own.
† Go to https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20171201 to visit the article page for additional materials and author  
disclosure statements.

===== PAGE 2 =====

678
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW MARCH 2020
The relationship between nominal exchange rate fluctuations and other nominal 
and real variables depends critically on the currency in which prices are rigid. The 
first generation of New Keynesian (NK) models, the leading paradigm in interna-
tional macroeconomics, assumes prices are sticky in the currency of the producing 
country. Under this “producer currency pricing” paradigm (PCP), the law of one 
price holds and a nominal depreciation raises the price of imports relative to exports 
(the  terms-of-trade) thus improving competitiveness. This paradigm was developed 
in the seminal contributions of Mundell (1963), Fleming (1962), Svensson and van 
Wijnbergen (1989), and Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995).
There is, however, pervasive evidence that the law of one price fails to hold. Out 
of this observation grew a second pricing paradigm. In the original works of Betts 
and Devereux (2000) and Devereux and Engel (2003), prices are instead assumed to 
be sticky in the currency of the destination market. Under this “local currency pric-
ing” paradigm (LCP), a nominal depreciation lowers the price of imports relative to 
exports, a decline in the  terms-of-trade, thus worsening competitiveness. Both par-
adigms have been extensively studied in the literature and are surveyed in Corsetti, 
Dedola, and Leduc (2010).
Recent empirical work on the currency of invoicing of international prices ques-
tions the validity of both approaches. Firstly, there is very little evidence that the best 
description of pricing in international markets follows either PCP or LCP. Instead, 
the vast majority of trade is invoiced in a small number of “dominant currencies,” 
with the US dollar playing an outsized role. This is documented in Goldberg and 
Tille (2008) and in Gopinath (2015). Secondly, exporters price in markets char -
acterized by strategic complementarities in pricing that give rise to variations in 
desired  markups.1 Thirdly, most exporting firms employ imported inputs in produc-
tion, reducing the value-added content of exports.2 The workhorse NK models in the 
literature à la Galí and Monacelli (2005) instead assume constant demand elasticity  
and/or abstract from intermediate inputs.
Based on these observations, this paper proposes an alternative: the “dominant 
currency paradigm” (DCP). Under DCP, firms set export prices in a dominant cur -
rency (most often the dollar) and change them infrequently. They face strategic 
complementarities in pricing, and there is roundabout production using domestic 
and foreign inputs. We then test this paradigm using a newly constructed dataset 
of bilateral price and volume indices for more than 2,500 country pairs that covers 
91 percent of world trade, and a firm-level database of the universe of Colombian 
exports and imports.
According to DCP, the following should hold true. First, at both short and medium 
horizons the  terms-of-trade should be insensitive to exchange rate fluctuations. 
Second, for  non-US countries, exchange rate  pass-through into import prices (in 
home currency) should be high and driven by the dollar exchange rate as opposed to 
1 Burstein and Gopinath (2014) surveys the evidence on variable  markups.
2 The fact that most exporters are also importers is well documented. See Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2009); 
Kugler and Verhoogen (2009); and Manova and Zhang (2009) among others. This is also reflected in the fact that 
value-added exports are significantly lower than gross exports, particularly for manufacturing, as documented in 
Johnson (2014) and Johnson and Noguera (2012). Amiti, Itskhoki, and Konings (2014) presents empirical evidence 
of the influence of strategic complementarities in pricing and of imported inputs on pricing decisions of Belgian 
firms. 

===== PAGE 3 =====

679
GOPINATH ET AL.: DOMINANT CURRENCY PARADIGMVOL. 110 NO. 3
the bilateral exchange rate. For the United States, on the contrary,  pass-through into 
import prices should be low. Third, for  non-US countries, import quantities should 
be driven by the dollar exchange rate as opposed to the bilateral exchange rate. In 
addition, US import quantities should be less responsive to dollar exchange rate 
movements as compared to  non-US countries. Fourth, when the dollar appreciates 
uniformly against all other currencies, it should lead to a decline in trade between 
countries in the rest of the world (i.e., excluding the United States).
The stability of the  terms-of-trade under DCP follows from the pricing of imports 
and exports in a common currency and the low sensitivity of these prices to exchange 
rate fluctuations. This contrasts with the predictions of the PCP and LCP paradigms. 
Under PCP ( LCP) the  terms-of-trade depreciates ( appreciates) almost  one-to-one 
with the exchange rate as the price of imports rises (is stable) alongside stable (rising) 
export prices, in home currency. It also differs from predictions of models with flex-
ible prices and strategic complementarities in pricing such as Atkeson and Burstein 
(2008) and Itskhoki and Mukhin ( 2017). Unlike these models, the  terms-of-trade 
stability under DCP is associated with volatile movements of the relative price of 
imported to domestic goods for  nondominant (currency) countries. Furthermore, this 
volatility is driven by fluctuations in the value of the country’s currency relative to 
the dominant currency, regardless of the country of origin of the imported goods. 
Consequently, demand for imports depends on the value of a country’s currency rel-
ative to the dominant currency. When a country’s currency depreciates relative to 
the dominant currency, all else equal, it reduces its demand for imports from all  
countries.
In the case of exports, in contrast to PCP, which associates exchange rate depreci-
ations with increases in quantities exported (controlling for demand), DCP predicts 
a negligible impact on goods exported to the  dominant-currency destination. For 
exporting firms whose dominant currency prices are unchanged, there is no increase 
in exports. For those firms changing prices the rise in marginal cost following the rise 
in the price of imported inputs and the complementarities in pricing dampen their 
incentive to reduce prices, leaving exports mostly unchanged. The impact on exports 
to  nondominant currency destinations depends on the fluctuations of the exchange 
rate of the destination country currency with the dominant currency. If the exchange 
rate is stable then DCP predicts a weak impact on exports to  non-dollar destinations. 
On the other hand, if the destination country currency weakens (strengthens) rela-
tive to the dominant currency it can lead to a decline (increase) in exports.
Fluctuations in the value of dominant currencies can also have implications for 
cyclical fluctuations in global trade (the sum of exports and imports). Under DCP, 
a strengthening of dominant currencies relative to  non-dominant ones is associ-
ated with a decline in imports across the periphery without a significant increase 
in exports to dominant currency markets, thus negatively impacting global trade. In 
contrast, in the case of PCP, the rise in competitiveness for the periphery generates 
an increase in exports. Moreover, the increase in exports dampens the decline in 
imports as production relies on imported intermediate inputs. In the case of LCP, 
both the import and export response is muted so the impact on global trade is weak.
We further demonstrate numerically that the different paradigms lead to contrast-
ing implications for the transmission of monetary policy shocks within and across 
countries. With a Taylor rule, the  inflation-output  trade-off in response to a monetary 

===== PAGE 4 =====

680
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW MARCH 2020
policy (MP) shock for a  nondominant currency worsens under DCP relative to PCP. 
That is, a monetary policy rate cut raises inflation by much more than it increases 
output, as compared to PCP. Further, under DCP, contractionary MP shocks in the 
dominant country have strong spillovers to MP in the  rest of the world and reduce 
 rest-of-world and global trade, while MP shocks in  nondominant currency countries 
generate only weak spillovers and have little impact on world trade.
Our empirical findings strongly support the predictions of DCP. Using the global 
database of bilateral trade price and volume indices we show the following. First, a 
regression of the bilateral  noncommodities terms-of-trade on changes in the bilat-
eral exchange rate yields a contemporaneous coefficient on the exchange rate of 
0.037, with a 95 percent confidence interval   [0.02, 0.05]  , consistent with DCP. For 
comparison, the coefficient should be close to  1  under PCP and to  −1  under LCP.
For our second finding, we estimate exchange rate  pass-through and trade elas-
ticity regressions at the  country-pair level. We first follow standard practice and 
estimate the  pass-through of bilateral exchange rates into import prices and vol-
umes.3 We document that when country  j ’s currency depreciates relative to country  i  
by 10 percent, import prices in country  j  for goods imported from country  i  rise by 
8 percent, suggestive of close to complete  pass-through at the one-year horizon. 
However, adding the US dollar exchange rate as an additional explanatory vari-
able and controlling for the global business cycle with time  fixed effects knocks the 
coefficient on the bilateral exchange rate from 0.76 down to 0.16. The coefficient 
on the dollar exchange rate of 0.78 largely dominates that of the bilateral exchange 
rate. Moreover, the magnitude of the dollar  pass-through is systematically related to 
the dollar invoicing shares of countries. Specifically, increasing the dollar invoicing 
share by 10 percentage points causes the contemporaneous dollar  pass-through to 
increase by 3.5 percentage points. Similar to the price regressions, adding the US 
dollar exchange rate to a bilateral volume forecasting regression knocks down the 
coefficient on the bilateral exchange rate by a substantial amount. The contempora-
neous volume elasticity for the dollar exchange rate is −0.19, while the elasticity for 
the bilateral exchange rate is an order of magnitude smaller at −0.03.
These  pass-through estimates point to a potential misspecification in the stan-
dard  pass-through regressions that ignore the role of the dollar. We also show that 
the dollar’s role as an invoicing currency is indeed special, as it handily beats the 
explanatory power of the euro in price and volume regressions. The data are also 
consistent with an additional key prediction of the dominant currency paradigm: US 
import prices and volumes are significantly less sensitive to the exchange rate, as 
compared to other countries’ imports.
Third, we demonstrate empirically that the strength of the US dollar is a key pre-
dictor of  rest-of-world (i.e., excluding the United States) trade volume and inflation, 
again controlling for measures of the global business cycle. We find that a 1 percent 
appreciation of the US dollar relative to all other currencies is associated with a 
0.6 percent contraction in  rest-of-world aggregate import volume within the year. 
3 This follows naturally from the classic  Mundell-Fleming paradigm, according to which the price an importing 
country faces (when expressed in the importing country’s currency) fluctuates closely with the bilateral exchange 
rate. Accordingly, studies of exchange rate  pass-through focus on  trade-weighted or bilateral exchange rate changes 
(Goldberg and Knetter 1997, Burstein and Gopinath 2014).

===== PAGE 5 =====

681
GOPINATH ET AL.: DOMINANT CURRENCY PARADIGMVOL. 110 NO. 3
Furthermore, countries with larger dollar import invoicing shares experience higher 
 pass-through of the dollar exchange rate into consumer and producer price inflation.
The global database has the advantage of covering almost all of world trade, but it 
is not at the firm level and is only available at an annual frequency. We demonstrate 
that all our aggregate findings hold also when we use  firm-level data from Colombia, 
a small open economy that is representative of emerging markets in its heavy reli-
ance on dollar invoicing with 98 percent of exports invoiced in dollars. Using prices 
and quantities defined at the  firm-10-digit  product-country (origin or destination) 
quarter (or year) level for manufactured goods (excluding petrochemical and basic 
metal industries), we confirm that the US dollar exchange rate knocks down the 
bilateral exchange rate for price pass-through and trade elasticity of exports and 
imports to/from  non-dollarized economies. Further, we demonstrate that DCP is 
able to match the dynamics of price  pass-through.
To further contrast the different pricing paradigms, we simulate a model economy 
that is subject to commodity price shocks, productivity shocks, and third country 
exchange rate shocks, all calibrated to Colombia, and test its ability to match the 
data. Using a combination of calibration and estimation, we document that the data 
strongly reject PCP and LCP in favor of DCP. We demonstrate that all features of 
DCP matter for quantitatively matching the facts, including strategic complemen-
tarities in pricing and imported input use. Under our benchmark DCP specification 
we find, in line with the data, the export  pass-through at four quarters to both dollar 
and  non-dollar destinations to be 65 percent. Instead, when we shut down strategic 
complementarities and imported input use, the predicted  pass-through declines by 
one-half to 30 percent.
Related Literature.—Our paper is related to a relatively small literature that 
models dollar pricing. These include Corsetti and Pesenti (2005); Goldberg and 
Tille (2008, 2009); Devereux, Shi, and Xu (2007); Cook and Devereux (2006); 
and Canzoneri et al. (2013). All of these models, with the exception of Canzoneri 
et al. (2013), are effectively static with  one-period-ahead price stickiness. Unlike 
Canzoneri et al. (2013), we explore a three-region world, which is crucial to ana-
lyze differences between dominant and  nondominant currencies. Goldberg and Tille 
(2009) explores three regions but in a static environment. In addition, the dollar 
pricing literature assumes constant desired  markups and production functions that 
use only labor.
Our contribution to this literature is  two-fold. Firstly, we develop a new Keynesian 
open economy model that combines dynamic dominant currency pricing, variable 
 markups, and imported input use in production. We develop testable implications 
and demonstrate the differential transmission of monetary policy shocks across 
countries. Secondly, we empirically evaluate the dominant currency paradigm using 
two novel databases described previously.
Our empirical evidence on the terms-of-trade is related to Obstfeld and Rogoff 
(2000), which conducts one of the earliest tests of the  Mundell-Fleming paradigm 
against the  Betts-Devereux-Engel paradigm. Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000) exam-
ines the correlation between  country-level terms-of-trade and the  trade-weighted 
exchange rate for 21 countries, using quarterly data for  1982–1998. They report 
an average correlation of 0.26, which they interpret as a rejection of local currency 

===== PAGE 6 =====

682
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW MARCH 2020
pricing. Even though the correlation is well less than 1, which would lend weak 
support for producer currency pricing, they conjecture that the low correlation could 
be because of the construction of the  trade-weighted exchange rates and/or because 
their terms-of-trade measures include commodity prices. With the help of our glob-
ally representative dataset, we improve upon Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000) in several 
dimensions. Specifically, we examine the bilateral terms-of-trade, excluding com-
modity prices, and we estimate  pass-through coefficients as opposed to correlations. 
Moreover, we test additional predictions of the different pricing paradigms.
Our exchange rate  pass-through analysis is among the first to exploit a glob-
ally representative dataset on bilateral trade volumes and values. To our knowledge, 
the only other work that utilizes a similarly rich dataset is Bussière, Gaulier, and 
Steingress (2016), which analyzes trade prices and quantities at the product level.4
The remaining literature on exchange rate  pass-through falls into two main 
camps. First, many papers use unilateral (i.e.,  country-level) time series, which lim-
its the ability to analyze  cross-sectional heterogeneity and necessitates the use of 
 trade-weighted rather than truly bilateral exchange rates (e.g., Leigh et al. 2015). 
Second, a recent literature estimates  pass-through of bilateral exchange rates into 
 product-level prices, as opposed to unit values, but these micro datasets are available 
for only a few countries (see the review by Burstein and Gopinath 2014).
The evidence on asymmetric responses of the volume of exports and imports is 
consistent with that documented by Alessandria, Pratap, and Yue (2013) for exports 
and Gopinath and Neiman (2014) for imports.5
Outline.—Section I presents the DCP model, proposes testable implications, 
and contrasts the transmission of monetary policy shocks across pricing paradigms. 
Section II empirically tests the implications derived in Section I using the global 
database. Section III tests and estimates the model using the Colombian microdata. 
Section IV concludes.
I. Model
Consider an economy  j  that trades goods and assets with the rest of the world. 
The nominal bilateral exchange rate between country  j  and another country  i  is 
denoted    ij   , expressed as the price of currency  i  in terms of currency  j . We assume 
that the US dollar is the dominant currency and let    $j    denote the price of a US dollar 
in currency  j . An increase in    ij    (respectively,    $j   ) represents a depreciation of coun-
try  j ’s currency against that of country  i  (respectively, the dollar).
As in the canonical open economy framework of Galí (2008), firms adjust prices 
infrequently à la Calvo. However, we depart from Galí (2008) along four dimen-
sions. First, we nest three different pricing paradigms: producer currency pricing, 
local currency pricing, as well as dominant currency pricing. Second, the  production 
4 The goal of that paper is to quantify the elasticity of prices and quantities to the bilateral exchange rate and 
check if  Marshall-Lerner conditions hold. In contrast, our goal is to empirically evaluate the predictions of the var-
ious pricing paradigms and in the process highlight the dollar’s central role in global trade.
5 The typical explanations for the sluggish export response relies on quantity frictions arising from sunk or 
search costs under PCP. DCP, consistent with the data, predicts that such relative prices are stable and therefore, 
does not require quantity frictions in the  short term to generate slow adjustments in exports.

===== PAGE 7 =====

683
GOPINATH ET AL.: DOMINANT CURRENCY PARADIGMVOL. 110 NO. 3
function uses not just labor but also intermediate inputs produced domestically and 
abroad. Third, we allow for strategic complementarity in pricing that gives rise to 
variable, as opposed to constant,  markups. Last, international asset markets are 
incomplete with only  riskless bonds being traded, while Galí (2008) assumes com-
plete markets. We describe the details below.
A. Households
Country  j  is populated with a continuum of symmetric households of measure 
1. In each period household  h  consumes a bundle of traded goods   C j,t   (h)  . Each 
household also sets a wage rate   W j,t   (h)   and supplies an individual variety of labor  
  N j,t   (h)   in order to satisfy demand at this wage rate. Households own all domestic 
firms. To simplify exposition we omit the indexation of households when possible. 
The  per-period utility function is separable in consumption and labor and given by
(1)  U ( C j,t  ,  N j,t  )  =   1 _ 1 −  σ c      C  j,t  1− σ c    −   κ _ 1 + φ    N  j,t  1+φ  
where   σ c   > 0  is the household’s coefficient of relative risk aversion,  φ > 0  is the 
inverse of the Frisch elasticity of labor supply and  κ  scales the disutility of labor.
The consumption aggregator   C j,t    is implicitly defined by a Kimball (1995) homo-
thetic demand aggregator,
(2)   ∑ 
i
  
 
     1 _ | Ω i  |    ∫ ω∈ Ω i    
 
    γ ij   ϒ (  | Ω i  |  C ij,t   (ω)  _  γ ij    C j,t    )  dω = 1. 
In equation (2),   C ij,t   (ω)   represents the consumption by households in country  j  of 
variety  ω  produced by country  i  at time  t . The term   γ ij    is a set of preference weights 
that captures home consumption bias in country  j , with   ∑ i       γ ij   = 1 , while  |  Ω i   |  is the 
measure of varieties produced in country  i . The function  ϒ ( · )   satisfies the constraints  
 ϒ (1)  = 1 ,  ϒ′ ( · )  > 0 , and  ϒ″ ( · )  < 0 . As is  well known, this demand structure 
gives rise to strategic complementarities in pricing and variable  markups. It captures 
the classic Dornbusch (1987) and Krugman (1987) channel of variable  markups and 
 pricing-to-market as described below.
Households in country  j  solve the following dynamic optimization problem,
(3)    max  
 C j,t  , W j,t  , B $j,t+1  , B j,t+1   (s′) 
    E 0    ∑ 
t=0
  
∞
    β   t  U ( C j,t  ,  N j,t  ) , 
where   E t    denotes expectations conditional on information available at time  t , subject 
to the  per-period budget constraint expressed in home currency,
(4)   P j,t    C j,t   +   $j,t   (1 +  i  j,t−1  $  )  B  j,t  $   +  B j,t   
   =  W j,t   (h)  N j,t   (h)  +  Π j,t   +   $j,t    B  j,t+1  $   +   ∑ 
s′∈
    Q j,t   (s′)   B j,t+1   (s′) . 
In this expression,   P j,t    is the price index for the domestic consumption aggregator  
  C j,t   . The term   Π j,t    represents domestic profits transferred to domestic households, 

===== PAGE 8 =====

684
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW MARCH 2020
owners of domestic firms. On the financial side, households trade a  risk-free inter-
national bond denominated in dollars that pays a nominal interest rate   i  j,t  $   .6  The term 
  B  j,t+1  $    denotes the dollar debt holdings of this bond at time  t . They also have access 
to a full set of domestic state contingent securities (in  j  currency) that are traded 
domestically and in zero net supply. Denoting    the set of possible states of the 
world,   Q j,t   (s)   is the period- t  price of the security that pays one unit of home currency 
in period  t + 1  and state  s ∈  , and   B j,t+1   (s)   are the corresponding holdings.
The optimality conditions of the household’s problem yield the following demand 
system:
(5)   C ij,t   (ω)  =  γ ij   ψ ( D j,t      P ij,t   (ω)  _  P j,t    )  C j,t  , 
where  ψ ( · )  ≔  ϒ′   −1  ( · )  > 0  so that  ψ′ ( · )  < 0 ,   D j,t   ≔  ∑ i        ∫  Ω i    
 
   ϒ′ (  
| Ω i  |  C ij,t   (ω) 
 _  γ ij    C j,t    )   
×   
 C ij,t   (ω) 
 _  C j,t     dω  is a demand index and   P ij,t   (ω)   denotes the price of variety  ω  produced in 
country  i  and sold in country  j , in currency  j . Define the elasticity of demand   σ ij,t   (ω)  
≔ − ∂ log  C ij,t   (ω) /∂ log  Z ij,t   (ω)  , where   Z ij,t   (ω)  ≔  D j,t   ( P ij,t   (ω) / P j,t  )  . The log of the 
optimal flexible price  markup is   μ ij,t   (ω)  ≔ log ( σ ij,t  /( σ ij,t   − 1))  . It is  time-varying 
and we let   Γ ij,t   (ω)  ≔ ∂  μ ij,t  /∂ log  Z ij,t   (ω)   denote the elasticity of that markup. 
 By definition, the price index   P j,t    satisfies   P j,t    C j,t   =  ∑ i       ∫  Ω i    
 
     P ij,t   (ω)   C ij,t   (ω)  dω. 
 Intertemporal optimality conditions for international and domestic bonds are 
given by the usual Euler equations:
(6)   C  j,t  − σ c    = β (1 +  i  j,t  $  )   E t   [ C  j,t+1  − σ c        P j,t   _  P j,t+1          $j,t+1   _   $j,t    ]  ,
(7)   C  j,t  − σ c    = β (1 +  i j,t  )   E t   [ C  j,t+1  − σ c        P j,t   _  P j,t+1    ]  ,
where   (1 +  i j,t  )  =   ( ∑ s′∈       Q j,t   (s′) )    −1   is the inverse of the price of a nominally 
 risk-free  j -currency bond at time  t  that delivers one unit of  j  currency in every state 
of the world in period  t + 1 .
Households are subject to a Calvo friction when setting wages in  j -currency: in 
any given period, they may adjust their wage with probability  1 −  δ w   , and main-
tain the  previous-period nominal wage otherwise. As we will see, they face a 
downward sloping demand for the specific variety of labor they supply given by  
  N j,t   (h)  =   ( W j,t   (h) / W j,t  )    −ϑ  N j,t   , where  ϑ > 1  is the elasticity of labor demand 
and   W j,t    is the aggregate nominal wage in country  j , defined below. The standard 
optimality condition for wage setting is given by
(8)   E t   ∑ 
s=t
  
∞
    δ  w  s−t   Θ j,t,s    N j,s    W  j,s  
ϑ (1+φ) 
  
[
  ϑ _ ϑ − 1   κ  P j,s    C  j,s  σ    N  j,s  φ   −     W –   j,t     (h)    1+ϑφ  ________ 
 W  j,s  ϑφ 
  
]
  = 0, 
where   Θ j,t,s   ≔  β   s−t   ( C  j,s  − σ c   / C  j,t  − σ c   )  ( P j,t  / P j,s  )   is the stochastic discount factor between 
periods  t  and  s ≥ t  used to discount profits and    W –   j,t   (h)   is the optimal nominal reset 
6 This dollar interest rate can be country-specific, hence the dependency on  j  to reflect country risk premia, 
financial frictions, or to ensure stationarity of the linearized model.

===== PAGE 9 =====

685
GOPINATH ET AL.: DOMINANT CURRENCY PARADIGMVOL. 110 NO. 3
wage in period  t  and country  j . This implies that    W –   j,t   (h)   is preset as a constant  markup 
over the expected  weighted-average of future marginal rates of substitution between 
labor and consumption and aggregate wage rates, during the duration of the wage. 
Sticky wages are useful to match the empirical fact that  wage-based real exchange 
rates move closely with the nominal exchange rates.
B. Producers
Each producer in  j  manufactures a unique variety  ω , which is sold both domesti-
cally and internationally. The output of the firm is used both for final consumption and 
as an intermediate input for production. The production function uses a combination 
of labor   L j,t    and intermediate inputs   X j,t   , with a Cobb-Douglas production function:
(9)   Y j,t   =  e    a j,t     L  j,t  1−α   X  j,t  α   
where  α  is the share of intermediates in production and   a j,t    is an aggregate produc-
tivity shock. The intermediate input aggregator   X j,t    takes the same form as the con-
sumption aggregator in equation (2):
(10)   ∑ 
i
  
 
     1 _ | Ω i  |    ∫ ω∈ Ω i    
 
    γ ij   ϒ (  | Ω i  |  X ij,t   (ω)  _  γ ij    X j,t    )  dω = 1, 
where   X ij,t   (ω)   represents the demand by firms in country  j  for vari-
ety  ω  produced in country  i  as intermediate input. The labor input   L j,t    is a constant 
elasticity aggregator of the individual varieties   L j,t   (h)   supplied by each house-
hold,   L j,t   =   [ ∫ 0  1   L j,t     (h)     (ϑ−1) /ϑ  dh]    ϑ/ (ϑ−1)  ,  with  ϑ > 1 .
By symmetry, a good produced in  j  can be used for consumption or as an interme-
diate input in each country  i  and the demand for domestic individual varieties (both 
for consumption and as intermediate input) takes a form similar to that in equation (5).
Markets are assumed to be segmented so firms can set different prices by destina-
tion market and invoicing currency. Denote   P  ji,t  k   (ω)   the price of a variety  ω  originat-
ing in  j , sold in country  i , and invoiced in currency  k . The  per-period nominal profits 
of the domestic firm producing variety  ω  are then given by
(11)   Π j,t   (ω)  =  ∑ 
i,k
  
 
     kj,t    P  ji,t  k   (ω)   Y  ji,t  k   (ω)  −   j,t    Y j,t   (ω)  ,
with the convention that    jj,t   ≔ 1 . In that expression,   Y  ji,t  k   (ω)  =  C  ji,t  k   (ω)  +  
 X  ji,t  k   (ω)   is the demand for domestic variety  ω  from country  j  invoiced in cur -
rency  k  in country  i , both for consumption and as an input in production, while  
  Y j,t   (ω)  =  ∑ i,k       Y  ji,t  k   (ω)   is the total demand across destination markets  i  and invoicing 
currencies  k . The term    j,t    denotes the nominal marginal cost of country  j  firms in 
their home currency. Given equation (9), it is given by
(12)    j,t   =   1 _   α   α    (1 − α)    1−α    ·    W  j,t  1−α   P  j,t  α   _  e    a j,t     . 

===== PAGE 10 =====

686
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW MARCH 2020
The optimality conditions for hiring labor are given by
(13)   (1 − α)     Y j,t   _  L j,t     =    W j,t   _   j,t    ,  L j,t   (h)  =   (   W j,t   (h)  _  W j,t    )    
−ϑ
  L j,t  , 
with the aggregate nominal wage   W j,t    defined as   W j,t   =   [∫  W j,t    (h)    1−ϑ  dh]    
  1 _ 1−ϑ  
 ,  while 
the demand for intermediate inputs is determined by
(14)  α    Y j,t   _  X j,t     =    P j,t   _   j,t    ,  X ij,t   (ω)  =  γ ij   ψ ( D j,t      P ij,t   (ω)  _  P j,t    )   X j,t  . 
C. Pricing
Firms choose prices at which to sell in  j  and in international markets  i , with 
prices reset infrequently. As in Galí (2008), we consider a Calvo pricing environ-
ment where firms are randomly allowed to reset prices with probability  1 −  δ p   . A 
core focus of this paper is on the implications of various pricing choices by firms, in 
particular under dominant currency pricing. Consequently, we assume that firms can 
set their prices either in the producer currency (   j ), in the destination currency ( i ), or 
in the dominant currency ( $ ).
Denote   θ  ji  k    the fraction of exports from region  j  to region  i  that are priced in cur-
rency  k , with   ∑ k  
 
    θ  ji  k   = 1  for any pair   {i, j}  . We allow for all pricing combinations but 
will focus on subsets. The benchmark of PCP corresponds to the case where   θ  j,i   j   = 1  
for every  i ≠ j . The case of LCP corresponds to   θ  ji  i   = 1  for every  i ≠ j . Under 
DCP,   θ  ji  $   = 1  for every  i ≠ j . Lastly, we assume that all domestic prices are sticky in 
the home currency, an assumption consistent with a large body of evidence:   θ  jj   j   = 1  
for every  j .
Consider the pricing problem of a firm from country  j  selling in country  i  and 
invoicing in currency  k , and denote    P –    ji,t  
k
   (ω)   its reset price. This reset price satisfies 
the following optimality condition:
(15)   E t    ∑ 
s=t
  
∞
    δ  p  s−t   Θ j,t,s    Y  ji,s|t  k   (ω)  ( σ  ji,s  k   (ω)  − 1)  (  kj,s     P –    ji,t  k   (ω)  −    σ  ji,s  k   (ω)  _  σ  ji,s  k   (ω)  − 1     j,s  )  = 0. 
In this expression,   Y  ji,s|t  k   (ω)   is the quantity sold in country  i  invoiced in currency  k  
at time  s  by a firm that resets prices at time  t ≤ s  and   σ  ji,s  k   (ω)   is the elasticity of 
demand. This expression implies that    P –    ji,t  
k
   (ω)   is preset as a markup over expected 
future marginal costs expressed in currency  k ,    j,s   (ω) /  kj,s   , over the duration of 
the price spell. Observe that because of strategic complementarities, the  markup 
over expected future marginal costs is not constant.
D. Testable Implications
Before we close the model, we can already outline a number of testable implica-
tions of our framework for the joint behavior of exchange rates, export and import 
prices, and quantities. We explore them empirically in Section II.

===== PAGE 11 =====

687
GOPINATH ET AL.: DOMINANT CURRENCY PARADIGMVOL. 110 NO. 3
Using lower cases to denote the log of variables (e.g.,   p ij   = ln  P ij   ), country  j ’s 
import price inflation for goods originating from country  i  can be expressed as
  Δ p ij,t   =  ∑ 
k
  
 
    θ  ij  k   (Δ p  ij,t  k   + Δ e kj,t  ) , 
where the summation is over invoicing currencies. Under Calvo pricing,  
 Δ p  ij,t  k   =  (1 −  δ p  )  (  p –    ij,t  k   −  p  ij,t−1  k  )  , and    p –    ij,t  k    is the (log)  reset-price defined in equation 
(15). If all goods from  i  to  j  are either  producer-priced (PCP),  locally-priced (LCP) 
or priced in the dominant currency (DCP),   θ  ij  i   +  θ  ij   j   +  θ  ij  $   = 1  and we obtain
(16)  Δ p ij,t   =  θ  ij  i   Δ e ij,t   +  θ  ij  $   Δ e $j,t   +  (1 −  δ p  )  ∑ 
k
  
 
    θ  ij  k   (  p –    ij,t  k   −  p  ij,t−1  k  ) . 
In the very short run,   δ p   → 1 , and we can ignore the last term of the previ-
ous equation: changes in bilateral import prices and in the bilateral terms-of-
trade  TO T ij   =  P ij  / ( P ji     ij  )   only depend on the bilateral nominal exchange rates, the 
dollar exchange rate, and the share of trade invoiced in different currencies.
On the quantity side a  log-linear approximation (around a symmetric steady 
state) of equations (5) and (14) yields
  Δ y ij,t   = −  σ ij   (Δ p ij,t   − Δ p j,t  )  + Δ y  j,t  d  , 
where   σ ij    is the elasticity of demand and   y  j,t  d    is the (log) of aggregate demand in 
country  j .
PROPOSITION 1 ( Pass-Through): When prices are fully rigid and  predetermined 
in their currency of invoicing (  δ p   → 1 ),  pass-through into bilateral import prices 
expressed in currency  j  and quantities from country  i  to country  j  (controlling for 
destination prices   p j,t    and demand   y  j,t  d   ) are given by
(17)  Δ p ij,t   =  θ  ij  i   Δ e ij,t   +  θ  ij  $   Δ e $j,t   ,
(18)        Δ y ij,t   = −  σ ij   ( θ  ij  i   Δ e ij,t   +  θ  ij  $   Δ e $j,t  )  .
• In the case of PCP,   θ  ij  i   =  θ  ji   j   = 1  and
  Δ p ij,t   = Δ e ij,t  , Δ p ji,t   = − Δ e ij,t   ,
  Δto t ij,t   = Δ p ij,t   −  (Δ p ji,t   + Δ e ij,t  )  = Δ e ij,t   ,
  Δ y ij,t   = −  σ ij   Δ e ij,t   .
• In the case of LCP,   θ  ij   j   =  θ  ji  i   = 1  and
  Δ p ij,t   = 0, Δ p ji,t   = 0 ,
  Δto t ij,t   = Δ p ij,t   −  (Δ p ji,t   + Δ e ij,t  )  = −Δ e ij,t   ,
  Δ y ij,t   = 0. 

===== PAGE 12 =====

688
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW MARCH 2020
• In the case of DCP,   θ  ij  $   =  θ  ji  $   = 1  and
  Δ p ij,t   = Δ e $j,t  , Δ p ji,t   = Δ e $i,t   ,
  Δto t ij,t   = Δ p ij,t   −  (Δ p ji,t   + Δ e ij,t  )  = 0 ,
  Δ y ij,t   = −  σ ij,t   Δ e $j,t  . 
It should be clear that the predictions for prices, when prices are yet to change, do 
not depend on what drives the exchange rate variation, that is, whether it arises from 
monetary policy shocks, financial shocks, or other shocks. Empirically, we should 
expect those countries relying more heavily on dollar pricing to display greater sen-
sitivity to the dollar exchange rate, even when controlling for the bilateral exchange 
rate between countries  i  and  j .7 We summarize the testable implications of DCP 
below.
Testable Implications (Import Price and Quantity  Pass-Through):
 (i) The bilateral terms-of-trade should be insensitive to bilateral exchange rates.
 (ii) For  non-US countries exchange rate  pass-through into import prices (in 
home currency) should be high and driven by the dollar exchange rate as 
opposed to the bilateral exchange rate. Countries that rely more heavily on 
dollar import invoicing should see more of this effect. For the United States, 
on the contrary,  pass-through into import prices should be low.
 (iii) For  non-US countries, import quantities should be driven by the dollar 
exchange rate as opposed to the bilateral exchange rate. US import quan-
tities should be less responsive to dollar exchange rate movements as com-
pared to  non-US countries.
 (iv) When all countries’ currencies uniformly depreciate relative to the dollar, it 
should lead to a decline in trade between the rest of the world (i.e., excluding 
the United States).
The first three implications follow directly from Proposition 1. The last implica-
tion is obtained from the aggregation of import volumes across  country-pairs where 
the United States is neither the origin nor the destination country. Denote  ℝ  the set 
of such  country-pairs:  ℝ ≡  { (i, j) , i ≠ j, i ≠ $, j ≠ $ }  . Let   ω ij    denote country  j  
total  noncommodity import value from country  i  in some reference year, normal-
ized so that   ∑ ℝ       ω ij   = 1 . We conceptualize the  rest-of-world aggregate trade bun-
dle,   y ℝ,t   , as a  Cobb-Douglas aggregate of  individual-country bilateral (log) gross 
imports with weights   ω ij   :   y ℝ,t   ≔  ∑ ℝ        ω ij    y ij,t   . Ceteris paribus, under DCP, a uniform 
7 Note that if the source of the shock generates  comovement across exchange rates, the resulting collinearity 
would show up in the regressions as large standard errors around the point estimates on each bilateral exchange rate. 
As we report below, this is not an issue.

===== PAGE 13 =====

689
GOPINATH ET AL.: DOMINANT CURRENCY PARADIGMVOL. 110 NO. 3
depreciation relative to the dollar  Δ e $,t   > 0 , leads to a decline in  noncommodity 
trade in the rest of the world:
(19)  Δ y ℝ,t   =  ∑ 
ℝ
  
 
    ω ij   Δ y ij,t   = −  ( ∑ 
ℝ
  
 
    ω ij    σ ij,t  ) Δ e $,t   < 0. 
Under either PCP or LCP, the growth of the  rest-of-world trade is instead  Δ y ℝ,t   = 0 , 
either because bilateral  non-dollar exchange rates are unchanged (under PCP) or 
because there is no bilateral  pass-through (LCP).
As the horizon increases, the frequency of price adjustment increases and the 
 pass-through predictions depend also on the response of reset prices    p –    ij,t  k    to exchange 
rates. We demonstrate in Section IIIB that the divergent predictions across the dif-
ferent paradigms hold at longer than annual frequencies in the presence of strategic 
complementarities in pricing and imported input use.8
E. Closing the Model and Contrasting Shock Transmission
Before turning to our empirical results, this subsection demonstrates the differen-
tial transmission of monetary policy (MP) shocks across different pricing paradigms 
in a Small Open Economy (SOE). Then, using a  3-country Large Open Economy 
(LOE) framework, it further documents the asymmetry in monetary policy spill-
overs under DCP, depending on whether the MP shocks originate in the dominant 
currency country or elsewhere. We show that when countries follow a Taylor rule: 
(i) the  inflation-output  trade-off in response to a monetary policy shock for a small 
open economy worsens under DCP relative to PCP; (ii) MP shocks in the dominant 
country have strong spillovers to MP in the  rest of the world and reduce  rest-of-world 
and global trade, while MP shocks in  nondominant currency countries generate only 
weak spillovers and little impact on world trade. Details of the simulations are pro-
vided in the online Appendix.
Closing the Model.—To evaluate shock transmission, we need to close the model. 
This requires that in addition to the equilibrium conditions specified in Section I we 
spell out the processes for interest rates and impose market clearing conditions. We 
assume that the nominal interest rate in each country  i  is set by its monetary author-
ity and follows a Taylor rule with inertia:
   i i,t   −  i   ∗  =  ρ m   ( i i,t−1   −  i   ∗ )  +  (1 −  ρ m  )  ( ϕ M    π i,t   +  ϕ Y     y ̃   i,t  )  +  ε i,t  . 
8 This result does not depend on the exogeneity of the currency of invoicing. Some of the ingredients from our 
model, namely imported input use in production and strategic complementarities in pricing, are precisely those that 
would give rise endogenously to dominant currency in pricing. This is demonstrated by Gopinath, Itskhoki, and 
Rigobon (2010) in a partial equilibrium environment and Mukhin (2018) in a general equilibrium environment. 
Nonetheless, our testable predictions continue to hold, even after endogenizing the currency choice: as shown in 
Gopinath, Itskhoki, and Rigobon (2010), firms choose to price in currencies in which their reset prices are most 
stable, i.e., desired  medium-run  pass-through into the price (expressed in the invoicing currency) is low. In other 
words, our empirical findings will continue to be relevant in an environment with endogenous currency choice. 
Lastly, as the horizon increases the impact of exchange rate fluctuations on prices and quantities depend on the 
source of the shock. The ideal test would be to examine the joint response of exchange rates, prices, and quantities 
to an exogenous shock such as a monetary policy shock. The problem is that, in the data, exchange rate fluctuations 
have little to do with monetary policy shocks or other identified policy shocks. Instead exchange rates appear to be 
driven by a “residual” that the literature names “financial shocks.” Practically, this shows up as low power in testing 
the channel from identified exogenous shocks to exchange rates and to trade. 

===== PAGE 14 =====

690
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW MARCH 2020
In this expression,   ϕ M    captures the sensitivity of policy rates to consumer price 
inflation   π i,t   = Δln  P i,t   ,   ϕ Y    measures the sensitivity to the output gap    y ̃   i,t   ,   ρ m    captures 
the inertia in setting policy rates, while the target nominal interest rate is assumed 
equal to the steady state international borrowing rate   i   ∗  . Here,   ε i,t    evolves according 
to an  AR (1)   process,   ε i,t   =  ρ ε    ε i,t−1   +  ϵ  i,t  m    where   ϵ  i,t  m    are serially independently dis-
tributed innovations.9
Goods, labor, and domestic bond  market-clearing conditions require  
  Y i,t   (ω)  =  ∑ j       ( C ij,t   (ω)  +  X ij,t   (ω) )  ,   N i,t   =  L i,t  ,  and   B i,t   (s′)  = 0, ∀s′ ∈  . The 
remaining market clearing conditions depend on whether we consider a small open 
economy (SOE) or a large open economy (LOE) environment. In the SOE case, all 
foreign variables are taken as exogenous and not impacted by shocks in the SOE. In 
the LOE case, we impose the additional requirement that   ∑ j  
 
    B  j,t  $   = 0 .
Calibration.—
Preference Aggregator: We adopt the Klenow and Willis (2016) functional form 
for the demand function  ϒ ( · )  . This gives rise to the following demand for individ-
ual varieties:
   Y ij,t   (ω)  ≡  C ij,t   (ω)  +  X ij,t   (ω)  =  γ i     (1 + ϵln   σ − 1 _ σ   − ϵln  Z ij,t   (ω) )    
σ/ϵ
  ( C j,t   +  X j,t  )  ,
where   Z ij,t   (ω)  ≡  D j,t    ( P ij,t   (ω) / P j,t  )   as previously defined and  σ  and  ϵ  are two param-
eters that determine the elasticity of demand and its variability as follows:
   σ ij,t   (ω)  =   σ  ___________________   
 (1 + ϵln   σ − 1 _ σ   − ϵln  Z ij,t   (ω) ) 
  , 
  Γ ij,t   (ω)  =   ϵ  ________________________   
 (σ − 1 − ϵ ln   σ − 1 _ σ   + ϵ ln  Z ij,t   (ω) ) .
   
In a symmetric steady state   Z ij,t   (ω)  =  (σ − 1) /σ , the elasticity of demand is  σ  
while the elasticity of the  markup is  Γ = ϵ/ (σ − 1)  . Strategic complementarities 
and variable markups arise when  ϵ > 0 , while  ϵ = 0  corresponds to the constant 
elasticity case.
Parameter Values: Table 1 lists parameter values employed in the simulation. 
The time period is a quarter. Several parameters are set to values standard in the 
9 In Section  IIIB we examine moments of the stationary distribution for a small open economy. As is well 
known, in the absence of further assumptions the SOE model just described when solved around a well-behaved 
steady state with  β (1 +  i   ∗ )  = 1  is  nonstationary in that the level of real debt and therefore other real variables 
are permanently changed even in response to transitory shocks. To induce stationarity we follow  Schmitt-Grohé 
and Uribe (2003) and assume the dollar interest rate in country  i ≠   $  is an increasing function of its external 
debt,   i  i,t  $   =  i $,t   + ψ ( e   ( B  i,t+1  $  / P $  )−  B –    i  $   − 1)  +  ϵ  i,t  $   , where  ψ > 0  measures the responsiveness of the dollar rate to the 
country’s real dollar debt holdings   B  i,t+1  $  / P $    where   P $    is exogenous from the SOE perspective. The term    B –    i  
$
   is the 
exogenous  steady-state real dollar debt holdings. This is a standard assumption in the small open economy litera-
ture to induce stationarity in a  log-linearized environment. Because of the dependence on aggregate debt individual 
households do not internalize the effect of their borrowing choices on the interest rate. In this section we study the 
impulse response to a small one-time shock and consequently the model with or without the stationarity assumption 
delivers almost identical results, as also shown by  Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2003).

===== PAGE 15 =====

691
GOPINATH ET AL.: DOMINANT CURRENCY PARADIGMVOL. 110 NO. 3
literature (see, e.g., Galí 2008). Following Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo 
(2011) we set the wage stickiness parameter   δ w   = 0.85  corresponding roughly to 
a year-and-a-half average duration of wages. The steady-state elasticity of substitu-
tion between varieties  σ  is assumed in the model to be the same across and within 
regions. Accordingly, we calibrate to an average of these elasticities measured in 
the literature. Specifically, Broda and Weinstein (2006) obtains a median elasticity 
estimate of 2.9 for substitution across imported varieties, while Feenstra, Obstfeld, 
and Russ (2010) estimates a value close to 1 for the elasticity of substitution across 
domestic and foreign varieties. Thus, we set  σ = 2 .
To parameterize  ϵ , which controls the strength of the strategic complementarities, 
we rely on estimates from the micro  pass-through literature that converges on very 
similar values for  Γ  despite the differences in data and methodology. Following 
Amiti, Itskhoki, and Konings (2014, 2019) and Gopinath and Itskhoki (2011) we 
set  Γ = 1 . Because in steady state  Γ = ϵ/ (σ − 1)   this implies  ϵ = 1 . The home 
bias share is set to 0.7. This implies  steady-state spending on imported goods in the 
consumption bundle and intermediate input bundle equal to 30 percent.10
Small Open Economy.—In this section we contrast the impulse responses to 
a monetary policy shock in an SOE (labeled  H ) under different pricing regimes. 
Figure 1 plots the impulse response to a 25 basis point exogenous cut in domestic 
interest rates (panel A). In each panel, we contrast the response under three regimes: 
Dominant Currency Paradigm (DCP), Producer Currency Pricing (PCP), and Local 
Currency Pricing (LCP).
10 For the SOE case we assume exogenous  rest-of-world demand such that exports as a ratio of GDP is 45 per-
cent. The specific value of this ratio is not essential to the results.
Table 1—Parameter Values for Calibrated Model
Parameter Value
Household preferences
 Discount factor  β 0.99
 Risk aversion   σ c   2.00
 Frisch elasticity of  N   φ   −1  0.50
 Disutility of labor  κ 1.00
 Labor demand elasticity  ϑ 4.00
 Steady-state NFA    B –     
$
  0
Production
 Intermediate share  α 2/3
 (log) productivity  a 1
Demand
 Elasticity  σ 2.00
 Super-elasticity  ϵ 1.00
 Home-bias  γ 0.70
Rigidities
 Wage   δ w   0.85
 Price   δ p   0.75
Monetary rule
 Inertia   ρ m   0.50
 Inflation sensitivity   ϕ M   1.5
 Output gap sensitivity   ϕ Y   0.50/4
 Shock persistence   ρ ε   0.50
 Steady-state interest rate   i   ∗    (1/β)  − 1 

===== PAGE 16 =====

692
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW MARCH 2020
Exchange Rate and Inflation:  Following the monetary shock, domestic interest 
rates decline but less than  one-to-one as the exchange rate    $H    depreciates by around 
0.8 percent (panel C of Figure 1) raising inflationary pressures on the economy 
(panel B). This in turn dampens the fall in nominal interest rates via the monetary 
policy rule. As seen in panel B, the increase in inflation in the case of DCP and 
PCP far exceeds that of LCP since exchange rate movements have a smaller impact 
on the domestic prices of imported goods when import prices are sticky in local 
currency.
 Terms-of-Trade: The exchange rate depreciation is associated with almost a 
 one-to-one depreciation of the  terms-of-trade in the case of PCP and a  one-to-one 
appreciation in the case of LCP (panel D of Figure 1). In contrast, under DCP, 
the  terms-of-trade depreciate negligibly and remain stable because both export and 
import prices are stable in the dominant currency.
Figure 1. Impulse Response to a Monetary Policy Shock in an SOE
0 5 10 15 20 0 5 10 15 20
−0.3
−0.25
−0.2
−0.15
−0.1
−0.05
0
Panel A. Shock Panel B. In/f_lation
−0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0 5 10 15 20
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Panel C. Exchange rate
0 5 10 15 20
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Panel D. Terms-of-trade
0 5 10 15 20
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Panel E. Export price
0 5 10 15 20
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Panel F. Import price
0 5 10 15 20
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1. 2
DCP PCP LCP
0 5 10 15 20
−0.6
−0.5
−0.4
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0 5 10 15 20
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Panel I. OutputPanel G. Export quantity Panel H. Import quantity

===== PAGE 17 =====

693
GOPINATH ET AL.: DOMINANT CURRENCY PARADIGMVOL. 110 NO. 3
Exports and Imports: With stable export and import prices in the dominant cur-
rency under DCP, the home currency price of exports and imports rises with the 
exchange rate depreciation as depicted in panels E and F of Figure 1. This in turn 
generates a significant decline in  trade-weighted imports (0.43 percent), despite the 
expansionary effect of monetary policy, and only a modest increase in  trade-weighted 
exports (0.1 percent) (panels G and H). This contrasts with the PCP benchmark that 
generates a large increase in exports and with the LCP benchmark that generates an 
increase in imports (from the demand expansion). The decline in imports in the case 
of PCP is lower than that under DCP because of export expansion under PCP and 
the use of imported inputs.
Output: As depicted in panel I of Figure 1, the expansionary impact on output is 
muted under DCP relative to PCP, with the lowest impact under LCP. Under DCP, 
there is an expenditure switching effect from imports toward domestic output that 
is absent under LCP, while DCP misses out on the expansionary impact on exports 
under PCP. Comparing panel B and panel I, the  inflation-output  trade-off in response 
to expansionary monetary policy worsens under DCP relative to both PCP and LCP 
(where output does not expand much, but inflation increases the least). In the case 
of DCP, inflation rises by 0.35 percent on impact and output by 0.56 percent, a ratio 
of 0.4. In the case of PCP, that ratio is almost halved to  0.2/0.8 = 0.25 . The ratio 
is lowest for LCP at  0.07 .
Large Open Economies.—For the LOE case we consider three economies,  U ,  G , 
and  R . These economies are symmetric, except for international pricing and bond 
markets in which the dollar (the currency of  U ) is dominant.11 Assuming 100 per-
cent dollar pricing in international trade, we focus on the asymmetry in the transmis-
sion of monetary policy shocks that originate in  U , relative to those in  G/R .
Monetary Policy Shock in Dominant Currency Country: We first consider a pos-
itive 25 basis point shock to the nominal interest rate in  U . The impulse responses 
to this monetary tightening are plotted in Figure 2. The outcomes in  G  and  R  are the 
same for all variables, including their exchange rates, both of which depreciate by 
0.65 percent relative to the dollar on impact.
The rise in interest rates in  U  leads to a decline in output (−0.6 percent, panel E), 
an appreciation of the dollar (0.65 percent, panel C), and a fall in inflation (−0.02 
percent, panel D). The decline in inflation is, however, negligible (in contrast to 
PCP) because dollar pricing generates a low  pass-through of the dollar appreciation 
into the price of imported goods, as seen in panel G of Figure 2. On the other hand, 
the  pass-through into export prices (in the destination currency) is high, as depicted 
in panel H, which in turn generates a significant decline in exports (panel I). Imports 
decline because of the decline in overall demand given MP tightening so overall, the 
11 We simulate the model also for the case when there is a full set of  Arrow-Debreu securities traded. The 
impulse responses, qualitatively and quantitatively, are very close. This is intuitive because under perfect foresight, 
the noncontingent bond is sufficient to complete the market, i.e., the equilibrium conditions of the cases with com-
plete markets and incomplete markets with a bond are the same. When an unanticipated shock hits, only the initial 
period’s equilibrium conditions differ across the two cases.

===== PAGE 18 =====

694
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW MARCH 2020
trade balance to GDP deteriorates mildly. The terms-of-trade (panel F) are largely 
unchanged.
The monetary tightening in  U  has a larger effect on inflation on impact in  G/R  
(0.2 percent, panel D) than in  U  because the depreciation has high  pass-through 
into import prices of the former countries. This in turn generates an endogenous 
increase in interest rates (0.15 percent, panel B) in  G/R  via the Taylor rule, leading 
to a mild contraction in output (−0.03 percent, panel E). Despite the depreciation 
of the  G/R  exchange rates relative to the dollar, their exports to  U  decline (−0.4 
percent, panel J) because dollar prices to  U  change by little so there is no significant 
positive expenditure switching effect, and the decline in overall demand in  U  gener-
ates a decline in exports to  U . Also, because of dollar pricing, there is a sharp decline 
in exports from  G  to  R  (−0.85 percent, panel J) and vice versa. This is because the 
depreciation of these countries’ currencies relative to the dollar makes all imports 
more expensive, leading to a switch in expenditures away from imported goods. 
Figure 2. Impulse Responses to a 25 Basis Point Monetary Tightening in  U 
Notes:  Rest-of-world trade is defined as the sum of quantities traded between  G  and  R . World trade is defined as the 
sum of export quantities from all countries.
−0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
Panel A. MP shock
−0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Panel B. Interest rate
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Panel C. Exchange
rate versus U
−0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
−0.7
−0.6
−0.5
−0.4
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
Panel E. Output
−2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Panel F. Terms-of-trade
−0.11
−0.1
−0.09
−0.08
−0.07
−0.06
−0.05
−0.04
Panel G. U import prices
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Panel H. G/R import
prices
Panel D. In/f_lation
0 5 10 15 20
−1
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
Panel I. U export 
volume
0 5 10 15 20
−1
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
Panel J. G/R export
volume
0 5 10 15 20
−1
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
Panel K. ROW trade
0 5 10 15 20
0 5 10 15 20 0 5 10 15 20 0 5 10 15 20 0 5 10 15 20
0 5 10 15 200 5 10 15 200 5 10 15 20 0 5 10 15 20
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
Panel L. World trade
/uni03F5U /uni03F5G /uni03F5R
yU yG yR totGU totRU totGR
πU πG πRiU iG iR eG eR
yUG yUR yGU yGR Trade GR World trade
pGU pRU pRG pUG
×10−3

===== PAGE 19 =====

695
GOPINATH ET AL.: DOMINANT CURRENCY PARADIGMVOL. 110 NO. 3
This is then further accentuated by the (mild) negative impact on consumption from 
the rise in interest rates in response to the inflationary effect.
As follows from the previous discussion, a monetary tightening in  U  and the 
accompanying uniform appreciation of the dollar relative to other countries gener -
ate a decline in  rest-of-world trade (−0.83 percent, panel K), defined as the sum of 
quantities traded between  G  and  R . It also causes a decline in global trade (−0.73 
percent, panel L), defined as the sum of export quantities from all countries.
Monetary Policy Shock in  Nondominant Currency Country: We next consider 
a 25 basis point monetary tightening in a  nondominant currency country. Without 
loss of generality, we set this to be  G . As depicted in panel C of Figure 3,  G ’s cur-
rency appreciates uniformly relative to  U  and  R  on impact, and by a magnitude sim-
ilar to that in panel C of Figure 2. This is because, despite the endogenous change in 
interest rates in each country (panel B of Figure 3 differs from panel B of Figure 2), 
the change in the interest rate differential between countries is quite similar, which 
is what matters for the exchange rate change.
The transmission of the shock to interest rates in  G  (panel B of Figure 3) is 
partly muted because the decline in inflation is endogenously contained through the 
Taylor rule. The negative impact on inflation of −0.2 percent (Figure 3, panel D) 
contrasts with the much smaller effect of an MP shock in  U  on  U ’s inflation (panel 
D of Figure 2). This differential response arises from the strong  pass-through of the 
appreciation of  G ’s currency into its import prices. The rise in interest rates in  G  
leads to a decline in output (−0.6 percent, panel E). While  pass-through into import 
prices (in  G ’s currency) is high (−0.6 percent, panel H),  pass-through into export 
prices (in destination currency) is low. Consequently, there is only a small negative 
impact on exports from  G  (−0.05 percent, panel J), in contrast to the large negative 
impact of an MP tightening in  U  on  U ’s exports (panel I of Figure 2). While exports 
are not responsive, there is a significant increase in imports into  G  from  U , and  R  
through the expenditure switching channel following the depreciation of their cur -
rencies relative to  G ’s (panel I of Figure 3). The terms-of-trade are stable, as in the 
case of the MP shock in  U  (panel G of Figure 3).
Since exports from  U  and  R  to  G  increase significantly, while exports out of  G  
decline only marginally, the monetary tightening in  G  is associated with an  expansion 
in global trade (panel L of Figure 3), and almost no effect on  rest-of-world trade 
(gross trade between  U  and  R , panel K).
II. Global Empirical Evidence
This section  tests the model predictions derived in Section ID, using bilateral 
trade volumes and unit values for a large number of countries. We show that, 
 consistent with DCP, the US dollar plays an outsized role in driving international 
trade prices and quantities. We first document that bilateral terms-of-trade are essen-
tially uncorrelated with bilateral exchange rates. Next, we demonstrate that the bilat-
eral (importer versus exporter) exchange rates matter less than the exchange rate 
 vis-à-vis the US dollar for  pass-through and trade elasticities of the average country 
in our sample. We also find the euro to be much less important than the dollar. The 
effects of the dollar are stronger when the importing country has a higher fraction 

===== PAGE 20 =====

696
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW MARCH 2020
of trade invoiced in dollars. The dollar’s role is greatest for trade between emerging 
market pairs, consistent with their higher reliance on dollar pricing. Finally, we 
show that the overall strength of the US dollar is a key predictor of gross trade and 
producer/consumer price inflation in the rest of the world.
A. Data
The core of our dataset consists of panel data on bilateral trade values and volumes 
from UN Comtrade (2017). UN Comtrade provides detailed annual customs data for 
a large set of countries at the HS  6-digit product level with information about the 
destination country, dollar value, quantity, and weight of imports and exports. This 
dataset makes it possible to compute volume changes over time for each product, 
and use the value data to infer unit values. Once unit values are calculated, we com-
Figure 3. Impulse Responses to a 25 Basis Point Monetary Tightening in  G  
Notes: Rest-of-world trade is defined as the sum of quantities traded between  U  and  R . World trade is defined as the 
sum of export quantities from all countries.
−0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
−0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
Panel A. MP shock Panel B. Interest rate
−0.5
−0.6
−0.7
−0.4
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
Panel C. Exchange
rate versus U
−0.05
−0.1
−0.15
−0.2
−0.25
0
0.05
−0.5
−0.4
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
Panel E. Output
−15
−10
−5
0
5
Panel F. Trade
balance-to-output
−10
−8
−6
−4
−2
−0.1
−0.2
−0.3
−0.4
−0.5
−0.6
−0.7
0
02
Panel G. Terms-of-trade Panel H. G import
prices
Panel D. In/f_lation
0 5 10 15 20
−0.1
0.5
0.6
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Panel I. U/R export
volume
0 5 10 15 20
−0.12
−0.1
−0.08
−0.06
−0.02
−0.04
0
0.02
Panel J. G export
volume
0 5 10 15 20
0.03
0.02
0.015
0.01
0.005
0
0.025
Panel K. ROW trade
0 5 10 15 20
0 5 10 15 20 0 5 10 15 20 0 5 10 15 20 0 5 10 15 20
0 5 10 15 200 5 10 15 200 5 10 15 20 0 5 10 15 20
−0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
Panel L. World trade
/uni03F5U /uni03F5G /uni03F5R
yU yG yR TBU TBG TBR
πU πG πRiU iG iR eG eR
yUG yUR yRU yRG yGU yGR Trade UR World trade
totGU totRU totGR pUG pRG
×10−3

===== PAGE 21 =====

697
GOPINATH ET AL.: DOMINANT CURRENCY PARADIGMVOL. 110 NO. 3
pute chained Fisher price indices to aggregate up from the product level to the bilat-
eral country level. We focus entirely on data for  noncommodity goods, except noted 
otherwise. Given the inherent difficulty in drawing a line between commodities and 
 noncommodities, we define commodities fairly broadly as HS chapters 1–27 and 
72–83, which comprise animal, vegetable, food, mineral, and metal products.
The biggest challenge for constructing price and volume indices using customs 
data is the  so-called unit value bias. Unit values, calculated by dividing observed 
values by quantities, are not actual prices. Even when there is no price change, unit 
values can change due to compositional shifts. To take a stab at correcting for this 
bias, we follow the methodology developed by Boz, Cerutti, and Pugacheva (2019). 
Specifically, we eliminate  6-digit products with a unit value variance higher than a 
threshold as those observations are more likely to be biased. To check whether this 
provides a sufficient fix, we compare our Comtrade estimated price indices with 
those reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) based on actual import prices 
for the United States. We find that our indices track the BLS import price indices 
fairly well. Results of this comparison, further details of Comtrade data construction 
as well as sources of other macroeconomic data are provided in online Appendix 
Section A.1.
B. Terms-of-Trade and Exchange Rates
We first relate bilateral terms-of-trade to bilateral exchange rates using panel 
regressions (testable implication (i)). In this subsection, a  cross-sectional unit is 
defined to be an unordered country pair, so that both trade flows between two coun-
tries  i  and  j  are associated with the  cross-sectional unit   {i, j}  . Recall that   p ij    denotes the 
(log) price of goods exported from country  i  to country  j  measured in currency  j ,   e ij    
the (log) bilateral exchange rate between country  i  and country  j  expressed as the 
price of currency  i  in terms of currency  j  and  to t ij   =  p ij   −  p ji   −  e ij    the (log) bilateral 
terms-of-trade, defined as the ratio of import prices to export prices (measured in 
the same currency). Moreover, let  pp i ij    denote the (log) ratio of the producer price 
index (PPI) in country  i  divided by PPI in country  j , with indices expressed in the 
same currency.
We consider regressions of the following form:
(20)  Δto t ij,t   =  λ ij   +  δ t   +   ∑ 
k=0
  
2
    β k   Δ e ij,t−k   +   ∑ 
k=0
  
2
    θ k   Δpp i ij,t−k   +  ε ij,t  , 
where   λ ij    and   δ t    are dyad (i.e., country pair) and time fixed effects. Regression equa-
tion (20) relates the growth rate of the bilateral terms-of-trade to the growth rate 
of the bilateral nominal exchange rate (and lags). As discussed in Section ID, if 
exporting firms set prices in their local currencies as in PCP and prices are sticky, the 
contemporaneous exchange rate coefficient   β 0    should equal 1. If instead exporting 
firms set prices in the destination currency as in LCP and prices are sticky, the con-
temporaneous exchange rate coefficient should be  − 1 . If most prices are invoiced 
in US dollars and are sticky in nominal terms, the coefficients   β k    should be close to 
zero. As indicated in equation (20), some of our specifications control for lags 0–2 
of the growth rate of the ratio of PPI in both countries, since firms’ optimal reset 
prices should fluctuate with domestic cost conditions.

===== PAGE 22 =====

698
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW MARCH 2020
We consider both unweighted and  trade-weighted regressions. To obtain trade 
weights, for each dyad and year, we compute the share of world  noncommodities 
trade value (in dollars) attributable to that dyad. Then, for each dyad, we compute 
the average share across the years 1992–2015.
In line with DCP, we find that bilateral exchange rates are virtually uncorrelated 
with bilateral terms-of-trade. The results of the panel regressions are shown in 
Table 2. If we do not control for relative PPI, the regression results indicate that the 
contemporaneous effect of the exchange rate on the terms-of-trade is positive. While 
the sign is consistent with PCP, the magnitude is not, as the 95 percent confidence 
interval equals [0.02, 0.05] in the unweighted regression, and [0.04, 0.13] in the 
weighted regression.12 The coefficients on the lags (not reported) are also small in 
magnitude. When controlling for relative PPI, the point estimates of the coefficients 
on the bilateral exchange rate shrink further toward zero, and confidence intervals 
remain narrow. Hence, our results lend strong support to DCP: the terms-of-trade 
are unresponsive to bilateral exchange rates.
Although the lack of correlation could in principle be consistent with a world of 
50 percent PCP and 50 percent LCP, the next subsections refute that possibility. In 
addition, while the lack of correlation is consistent with any currency being a domi-
nant currency, we provide evidence next that the major dominant currency is indeed 
the dollar. The stability of the terms-of-trade for the average country in our sample 
cannot be explained by a model with flexible prices and strategic complementari-
ties in pricing as in Atkeson and Burstein (2008) and Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017) 
because, as we show next, the import  pass-through into destination country prices 
 at-the-dock is high, while that into consumer or producer prices, reported in online 
Appendix Section A.2.2 , is an order of magnitude smaller, contrary to the presence 
of strong complementarities in pricing.
Lastly, online Appendix Section A.2.1 demonstrates that the terms-of-trade are 
nearly uncorrelated with the bilateral exchange rate across all advanced/emerging 
economy trade flows.
12 Attenuation bias is not a worry in this context, since the explanatory variables of interest (exchange rates) are 
precisely measured, except perhaps for time aggregation issues at the annual frequency.
Table 2—Terms-of-Trade and Exchange Rates
Unweighted Trade-weighted
 Δto t ij,t    Δto t ij,t    Δto t ij,t    Δto t ij,t   
(1) (2) (3) (4)
 Δ  e ij,t   0.0369 −0.00938 0.0813 0.0218
(0.00863) (0.0130) (0.0235) (0.0317)
PPI No Yes No Yes
R2 0.008 0.011 0.028 0.042
Observations 24,270 19,847 24,270 19,847
Dyads 1,347 1,200 1,347 1,200
Notes: The first (last) two columns use unweighted (trade-weighted) regressions. All regres-
sions include two  Δ ER lags and time fixed effects. Standard errors clustered by dyad. The 
number of dyads is about one-half that in Table 3 since here the two ordered country tuples   
(i,  j)   and   ( j, i)   are collapsed into one cross-sectional unit   {i,  j}  .

===== PAGE 23 =====

699
GOPINATH ET AL.: DOMINANT CURRENCY PARADIGMVOL. 110 NO. 3
C. Exchange Rate  Pass-Through into Prices
Next, we relate international prices and exchange rates (testable implication (ii)). 
Exchange rate  pass-through regressions are  reduced-form regressions that relate 
price changes to exchange rate changes and other control variables relevant for 
pricing. We follow the literature and estimate the standard  pass-through regres-
sion as described in Burstein and Gopinath (2014). In the rest of this section, the 
 cross-sectional unit is an ordered country pair   (i, j)  . We estimate
(21)   Δ p ij,t   =  λ ij   +  δ t   +   ∑ 
k=0
  
2
    β k   Δ e ij,t−k   +   ∑ 
k=0
  
2
    β  k  $  Δ e $j,t−k   
  +   ∑ 
k=0
  
2
    η k   Δ e ij,t−k   ×  S j   +   ∑ 
k=0
  
2
    η  k  $  Δ e $j,t−k   ×  S j   + θ′  X i,t   +  ε ij,t  , 
where   λ ij    and   δ t    are dyadic and time fixed effects;   X i,t    are other country  i  controls, 
namely the change in the (log) producer price index of the exporting country  i  mea-
sured in currency  i  (and two lags).13 We have modified the textbook  pass-through 
regression by including the dollar exchange rate, i.e., the log price   e $j    of a US dollar 
in currency  j , alongside the bilateral exchange rate, as suggested in Section ID. 
Lastly, we interact the bilateral and dollar exchange rates with the importing coun-
try’s dollar invoicing share   S j   . We consider different versions of this general specifi-
cation, omitting dollar exchange rates and/or interaction terms.
As a benchmark, the estimates from bilateral  pass-through regressions on 
bilateral exchange rates (i.e., omitting the dollar exchange rates and interaction 
terms) are reported in columns 1 and 4 of Table 3. The two columns correspond to 
unweighted and  trade-weighted regressions, respectively.14 According to the regres-
sion estimates, when country  j ’s currency depreciates relative to country  i  by 10 
percent, import prices in country  j  rise by 8 percent, suggestive of close to complete 
 pass-through at the one-year horizon.15 The second and third lags (not reported) are 
economically less important.
Columns 2 and 5 report estimates from regressions that include the dollar 
exchange rate in addition to the bilateral one. Including the dollar exchange rate 
sharply reduces the relevance of the bilateral exchange rate. It knocks the  coefficient 
on the bilateral exchange rate from 0.76 to 0.16 in the unweighted regression, and 
from 0.77 to 0.34 in the weighted regression. Instead, almost all of the effect is 
absorbed by the dollar exchange rate. 16 Notice that, due to our inclusion of time 
fixed effects, the apparent dominance of the dollar cannot be an artifact of spe-
cial conditions that may apply in times when the dollar appreciates or depreciates 
against all other currencies, for example due to global recessions or flight to safety 
13 Online Appendix Section A.2.5 shows that our results are robust to adding importer PPI and GDP growth as 
additional control variables.
14 Henceforth, the trade weights are given by the average (across the years 1992–2015) share of world 
 noncommodities trade value attributable to an ordered dyad   (i, j)  .
15 With year fixed effects this should be interpreted as fluctuations in excess of world annual fluctuations.
16 In the literature, unilateral exchange rate  pass-through is sometimes estimated using a Vector Error Correction 
Model (VECM) that allows for co-integration between price levels and exchange rates. However, Burstein 
and Gopinath (2014, p. 403) finds VECM results to be highly unstable across specifications, and this issue is likely 
to be compounded by measurement error in our bilateral data.

===== PAGE 24 =====

700
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW MARCH 2020
in asset markets. Online Appendix Section A.2.5 shows that our results are robust to 
the choice of time sample, including removing the  post-2008 period.
The  cross-dyad heterogeneity in  pass-through coefficients is related to the pro-
pensity to invoice imports in dollars. Columns 3 and 6 interact the dollar and bilat-
eral exchange rates with the share of invoicing in dollars at the importer country 
level, as in regression equation (21). Notice that we do not have data on the fraction 
of bilateral trade invoiced in dollars, so we use the importer’s  country-level share 
as a proxy. As expected, the import invoicing share plays an economically and sta-
tistically significant role for the dollar  pass-through. Depending on whether we use 
trade weights, the regression results indicate that increasing the dollar invoicing 
share by 10 percentage points causes the contemporaneous dollar  pass-through to 
increase by 3.5–7.6 percentage points. The   R   2   values of the panel regressions are 
substantially improved by adding the invoicing share interaction terms.
Figures 4 and 5 depict the regression results visually in the form of impulse 
response functions. Figure 4 shows the impulse responses of the bilateral import price 
level. The top row shows unweighted regression results, the bottom row uses trade 
weights as described above. The left column shows the bilateral  pass-through in the 
specifications without the dollar exchange rate, while the right column compares the 
bilateral and dollar  pass-throughs in specifications with both exchange rates. Figure 
5 illustrates the  pass-through heterogeneity as a function of the invoicing share   S j   , 
as implied by the regression specifications with interactions. The figure focuses on 
three dollar shares:   S j   = 0.13  (corresponding to Switzerland),   S j   = 0.59  (Turkey), 
and   S j   = 0.88  (Argentina). As depicted in Figure 5, dollar  pass-through is highest 
for Argentina with the largest dollar invoicing share and the least for Switzerland 
with its low dollar share. In the  trade-weighted regressions (bottom row of Figure 
5), dollar  pass-through is lower than bilateral  pass-through for Switzerland, and that 
ranking is flipped for the case of Turkey and Argentina.
Online Appendix Section A.2.1 shows that dollar dominance holds up qual-
itatively across flows between different country groups, advanced or emerging. 
Table 3—Exchange Rate Pass-Through into Prices
Unweighted Trade-weighted
 Δ p ij,t    Δ p ij,t    Δ p ij,t    Δ p ij,t    Δ p ij,t    Δ p ij,t   
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
 Δ e ij,t   0.757 0.164 0.209 0.765 0.345 0.445
(0.0132) (0.0126) (0.0169) (0.0395) (0.0449) (0.0336)
 Δ e ij,t   ×  S j   −0.0841 −0.253
(0.0240) (0.0482)
 Δ e $j,t   0.781 0.565 0.582 0.120
(0.0143) (0.0283) (0.0377) (0.0622)
 Δ e $j,t   ×  S j   0.348 0.756
(0.0326) (0.0796)
R2 0.356 0.398 0.515 0.339 0.371 0.644
Observations 46,820 46,820 34,513 46,820 46,820 34,513
Dyads 2,647 2,647 1,900 2,647 2,647 1,900
Notes: The first (last) three columns use unweighted (trade-weighted) regressions. All regressions include two  Δ ER 
lags, lags 0–2 of exporter  Δ PPI, and time fixed effects. Standard errors clustered by dyad.

===== PAGE 25 =====

701
GOPINATH ET AL.: DOMINANT CURRENCY PARADIGMVOL. 110 NO. 3
Although flows between emerging markets exhibit stronger dollar dominance, our 
results are not limited to flows involving emerging markets.17
D. Trade Volume Elasticity
Having demonstrated the outsized role of the US dollar for international prices, 
we now show that the dollar also dominates the bilateral exchange rate when pre-
dicting bilateral trade volumes (testable implication (iii)). Table 4 shows the results 
from panel regressions of trade volumes on bilateral and dollar exchange rates. 
Let   y ij    denote the log volume of goods exported from country  i  to country  j . Our vol-
ume regressions take the same form as in the price  pass-through regression, equation 
(21), except that the dependent variable is now the log growth rate  Δ y ij,t    of bilateral 
trade volumes, and the extra controls   X j,t    (here indexed by  j  rather than  i ) consist of 
the log growth rate of real GDP (and two lags) for the importing country  j . These 
regressions do not capture structural demand elasticity parameters, since we do not 
attempt to control for all relevant relative prices, and the importer’s GDP growth is 
17 These facts are in line with the results in Table 3 for regressions that interact with the dollar invoicing share, 
since emerging markets tend to have higher dollar invoicing shares.
Figure 4. Average Price Pass-Through
Notes: Impulse responses of bilateral price level to bilateral   e ij,t    and US$   e $j,t    exchange rates. Based on the regres-
sions in Table 3 without interactions. Top row: unweighted regression; bottom row:  trade-weighted. Left column: 
specifications (1) and (4), right column: specifications (2) and (5). Error bars: 95 percent confidence intervals, clus-
tering by dyad.
0
0.5
1
0
0.5
1
0 1 2 0 1 2
Panel A. Unweighted, bilateral only Panel B. Unweighted, bilateral versus US$
Panel C. Trade-weighted, bilateral only Panel D. Trade-weighted, bilateral
versus US$
Cumulative response to
1 percent shock, percent
Cumulative response to
1 percent shock, percent
Years after shock
Bilateral US$

===== PAGE 26 =====

702
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW MARCH 2020
an imperfect proxy for the level of import demand. In particular, we cannot simply 
add importer  ×  year fixed effects since these would absorb the dollar exchange 
rate. Hence, our results will invariably conflate expenditure switching and shifts in 
aggregate import demand. The correct interpretation is to view these regressions as 
predictive relationships that may inform potential structural estimation exercises. 
Nevertheless, we will refer to the coefficients on exchange rates as “trade elastici-
ties” for simplicity.
The volume regressions underline the dominant role played by the US dollar. As 
in the case of the price  pass-through regressions, adding the dollar exchange rate to 
the volume regressions knocks down the coefficient on the bilateral exchange rate 
by a substantial amount. The contemporaneous elasticity for the dollar exchange 
rate is about −0.19 to −0.13 across specifications, while the elasticity for the bilat-
eral exchange rate is an order of magnitude smaller. Unlike the price  pass-through 
regressions, the interactions of exchange rate changes with the importer’s dollar 
invoicing share are mostly imprecisely estimated here.
Figure 6 visually depicts the regression results in the form of impulse responses. 
The figure shows the response of the level of bilateral trade volume to exchange rate 
Figure 5. Price Pass-Through as a Function of Invoicing Share
Notes: Impulse responses of bilateral price level to bilateral   e ij,t    and US$   e $j,t    exchange rates, as a function of import-
er’s dollar invoicing share   S j   . Based on regression specifications (3) and (6) in Table 3 with interactions. Top row: 
unweighted regression; bottom row:  trade-weighted. Error bars: 95 percent confidence intervals, clustering by dyad.
0
0.5
1
0
0.5
1
0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2
Panel A. Unweighted, S = 0.13 Panel B. Unweighted,
S = 0.59
Panel C. Unweighted,
S = 0.88
Panel D. Trade-weighted, S = 0.13 Panel E. Trade-weighted,
S = 0.59
Panel F. Trade-weighted,
S = 0.88
Cumulative response to
1 percent shock, percent
Cumulative response to
1 percent shock, percent
Years after shock
Bilateral US$

===== PAGE 27 =====

703
GOPINATH ET AL.: DOMINANT CURRENCY PARADIGMVOL. 110 NO. 3
shocks. The right column shows results from regressions with both bilateral and 
dollar exchange rates. It is apparent from the figure that the dollar exchange rate has 
a much more negative impact effect than the bilateral exchange rate. Yet, the figure 
also shows that the effect of either exchange rate on the level is essentially neutral 
at horizons of 1–2 years. One potential explanation is that the ratio of import prices 
to domestic prices adjusts with a lag to exchange rate changes, implying that a year 
after the initial shock, relative prices faced by consumers are mostly unchanged 
compared to the period before the shock. However, we show in online Appendix 
Section A.2.5 that this particular finding is driven by the early years in our sample, 
as results on the 2002–2015 subsample point toward a large and persistent negative 
effect of dollar appreciations on the volume of bilateral trade.
Online Appendix Section A.2.1 confirms that the contemporaneous trade elastic-
ity of the dollar dominates the bilateral exchange rate elasticity in most breakdowns 
of emerging/advanced economy trade flows. Overall, the data indicate that a sub-
stantially negative dollar elasticity, coupled with a smaller bilateral exchange rate 
elasticity, is a common feature to emerging and advanced economy trade flows.
E. Trade Flows to and from the United States
The data are consistent with an additional key prediction of DCP: trade flows 
with the United States are special (testable implications ( ii)–(iii)). Specifically, we 
show that bilateral exchange rate  pass-through into US export prices (in the destina-
tion currency) is complete and immediate, while US import prices (in dollars) are 
insensitive to bilateral exchange rates. Moreover, US import volumes are insensitive 
to the bilateral exchange rate, as predicted by theory.
Figure 7 shows impulse response functions of import prices for goods flowing 
from or to the United States. These figures are obtained from panel regressions as in 
the baseline unweighted fixed effects specifications in Section IIC, except we drop 
the dollar exchange rate (but preserve the time fixed effects). Consistent with the 
Table 4—Trade Elasticity with Respect to Exchange Rate
Unweighted Trade-weighted
 Δ y ij,t    Δ y ij,t    Δ y ij,t    Δ y ij,t    Δ y ij,t    Δ y ij,t   
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
 Δ  e ij,t   −0.119 −0.0310 −0.0765 −0.0901 −0.0163 −0.0971
(0.0139) (0.0160) (0.0403) (0.0182) (0.0236) (0.0380)
 Δ  e ij,t   ×  S j   0.118 0.124
(0.0684) (0.0519)
 Δ  e $j,t   −0.186 −0.140 −0.155 −0.131
(0.0250) (0.0600) (0.0277) (0.0658)
 Δ  e $j,t   ×  S j   −0.0903 −0.00581
(0.0871) (0.0846)
R2 0.069 0.071 0.074 0.172 0.179 0.215
Observations 52,272 52,272 38,582 52,272 52,272 38,582
Dyads 2,807 2,807 2,014 2,807 2,807 2,014
Notes: The first (last) three columns use unweighted (trade-weighted) regressions. All regressions include two  Δ ER 
lags, lags 0–2 of importer  Δ GDP, and time fixed effects. Standard errors clustered by dyad.

===== PAGE 28 =====

704
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW MARCH 2020
very high fraction of US exports and imports being invoiced in dollars (97 percent 
and 93 percent, respectively), bilateral exchange rate  pass-through into prices is 100 
percent on impact for US exports and close to zero for US imports.
Table 5 confirms that US import volumes are insensitive to bilateral exchange 
rates, unlike the imports of the rest of the world from the United States. We run a 
fixed effects regression of trade volume growth on lagged bilateral exchange rates, 
importer GDP, and year fixed effects, as in specifications (1) and (4) of Table 4. Here, 
however, we additionally interact all  right-hand-side variables with an indicator for 
whether the importing country is the United States. When the importing country is 
not the United States, the  within-year bilateral trade volume response is estimated 
at −0.12 percent (unweighted) following a 1 percent depreciation of the importer 
currency, similar to the  all-country regression in Table 4. In contrast, we find US 
imports to be completely insensitive to the bilateral exchange rate on impact, with 
an implied contemporaneous import volume response of 0.003 percent following a 
1 percent depreciation of the dollar. The difference between the contemporaneous 
import elasticity for the United States versus that for the rest of the world is highly 
significant. Hence, the data indicate that US trade balance adjustment following 
exchange rate movements occurs primarily through exports rather than imports, a 
consequence of the predominance of dollar invoicing in US trade.
Figure 6. Average Trade Elasticity
Notes: Impulse responses of bilateral volume to bilateral   e ij,t    and US$   e $j,t    exchange rates. Based on regressions in 
Table 4 without interactions. Top row: unweighted regression; bottom row:  trade-weighted. Left column: specifi-
cations (1) and (4); right column: specifications (2) and (5). Error bars: 95 percent confidence intervals, clustering 
by dyad.
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0 1 2 0 1 2
Panel A. Unweighted, bilateral only Panel B. Unweighted,
bilateral versus US$
Panel C. Trade-weighted, bilateral only Panel D. Trade-weighted,
bilateral versus US$
Bilateral US$
Cumulative response to
1 percent shock, percent
Cumulative response to
1 percent shock, percent
Years after shock

===== PAGE 29 =====

705
GOPINATH ET AL.: DOMINANT CURRENCY PARADIGMVOL. 110 NO. 3
F. Effect of US Dollar on  Rest-of-World Trade and Inflation
Underscoring the quantitative significance of DCP, we argue now that the dollar 
has substantial predictive power for aggregate trade among countries in the rest 
of the world (testable implication (iv)). That is, the dollar is important for pre-
dicting global trade, even when excluding countries’ direct trade with the United 
States. Specifically, a 1 percent US dollar appreciation against all other currencies 
in the world predicts a 0.6 percent decline within a year in the volume of total trade 
between countries in the rest of the world, holding constant various proxies for the 
global business cycle.
We measure the elasticity of  rest-of-world trade volume to the dollar by aggregat-
ing up from our richest bilateral panel regression specification. This produces results 
that exploit our panel dataset, unlike a simple annual time series regression of global 
Figure 7. Price Pass-Through: Flows to and from United States
Notes: Impulse response of bilateral price level to bilateral exchange rate   e ij,t   . Panel A: US exports. Panel B: US 
imports. Error bars: 95 percent confidence intervals, clustering by dyad and applying  small-sample  LZ2-BM adjust-
ment in Imbens and Kolesár (2016).
0
0.5
1
0 1 2 0 1 2
Panel A. Exports from the United States Panel B. Imports to the United States
Cumulative response to
1 percent shock, percent
Years after shock
Table 5—Trade Elasticity: United States versus Non-United States Imports
Unweighted Trade-weighted
 Δ y ij,t    Δ y ij,t   
(1) (2)
 Δ e ij,t   −0.121 −0.107
(0.0141) (0.0194)
 Δ e ij,t   × ImpUS 0.124 0.117
(0.0329) (0.0318)
R2 0.069 0.180
Observations 52,272 52,272
Dyads 2,807 2,807
Notes: ImpUS is in indicator for whether importing country is the United States. Both regres-
sions include two  Δ ER lags, lags 0–2 of importer  Δ GDP, and time fixed effects, as well as 
interactions of these variables with ImpUS. Standard errors clustered by dyad.

===== PAGE 30 =====

706
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW MARCH 2020
trade on an effective dollar exchange rate index. Consider the following regression 
model with bilateral, dollar, and euro exchange rates, as well as interactions with 
dollar and euro import invoicing shares:
(22)   Δ y ij,t   =   ∑ 
k=0
  
2
    ( β k   +  η k   (1 −  S j   −  S  j  € ) ) Δ e ij,t−k   
  +   ∑ 
k=0
  
2
    ( β  k  $  +  η  k  $   S j  ) Δ e $j,t−k     +   ∑ 
k=0
  
2
    ( β  k  €  +  η  k  €   S  j  € ) Δ e €j,t−k   
  +  λ ij   + θ′  X ij,t   +  ε ij,t  . 
Here   S j    and   S  j  €   are the importer’s  country-level dollar and euro invoicing shares, 
respectively, and   λ ij    is a dyad fixed effect. Because we are interested in the effect of 
a dollar appreciation against all other currencies, we do not control for time fixed 
effects. Instead, we control for several proxies for the global business cycle, as 
described in online Appendix Section A.2.3, except here we exclude world export 
volume growth.   X ij,t    also includes lags 0–2 of importer real GDP growth.
The object of interest is the response of  rest-of-world (i.e.,  ex-US) aggregate 
trade volume to a 1 percent appreciation of the dollar relative to all other currencies, 
holding constant the global business cycle. As in equation (19), we consider the 
weighted average trade elasticity to a dollar appreciation, where we average over 
all trading pairs in the world, excluding the United States. Consistent with the focus 
on importers in the rest of this section, our empirical specification in equation (22) 
assumes that the trade elasticity is heterogeneous across importers but homogeneous 
across exporters. That is, in the notation of equation (19), the trade elasticity at lag  k  
with respect to the dollar exchange rate is given by   σ ij   =  σ j   =  β  k  $  +  η  k  $   S j   . Let   w j    
denote country  j ’s total  noncommodity import value from all countries except the 
United States in some reference year, normalized so that   ∑ j≠$       w j   = 1 .18 Then the  
ceteris paribus effect of a 1 percent dollar appreciation on   ∑ j≠$       w j   Δ y ij,t   , the weighted 
growth of  rest-of-world imports from destination  i , is given by
    ∑ 
j≠$
  
 
    w j   ( β  k  $  +  η  k  $   S j  )  =  β  k  $  +  η  k  $    ∑ 
j≠$
  
 
    w j    S j   ,
 k  years after the appreciation, and this quantity is by assumption the same for each 
exporter  i  other than the United States. Thus, to measure the response of  rest-of-world 
aggregate imports to a dollar appreciation, we simply use the estimated equation 
(22) to compute the impulse response of trade volume for an importer  j  whose 
US dollar invoicing share happens to equal   ∑ j≠$       w j    S j   , the weighted average dollar 
invoicing share.19
Figure 8 shows that  rest-of-world aggregate import volume contracts markedly 
following an appreciation of the dollar against all other currencies. A 1 percent ceteris 
18 “All countries” refers to the world aggregate in Comtrade, not only the countries in our regression sample. 
Note that the weight   w j    is different from the weights used in the  trade-weighted regressions in Table 4 and elsewhere.
19 In practice,   w j    depends on the year in which import values are measured, but online Appendix Section A.2.5 
shows that the weighted average   ∑ j≠$       w j    S j    fluctuates little around a mean of 0.40 in the 2002–2015 sample, so we 
use that value.

===== PAGE 31 =====

707
GOPINATH ET AL.: DOMINANT CURRENCY PARADIGMVOL. 110 NO. 3
paribus dollar appreciation leads to a 0.6 percent contraction in  rest-of-world trade 
volume within the year (regardless of whether we use unweighted or  trade-weighted 
regressions), and this contractionary effect persists out to at least two years. Recall 
that the regression controls for various proxies for the global business and finan-
cial cycles. While our regression specification cannot be interpreted structurally, 
the magnitude of the predictive effect underscores the importance of the dollar’s 
role in world trade. Online Appendix Section A.2.4 shows that the large negative 
predictive effect of a dollar appreciation on world trade is robust to controlling for 
the exchange rates of the Swiss franc and Japanese yen. Hence, the central finding in 
this subsection is not an artifact of conflating periods of overall dollar appreciation 
with periods of global flight to safety.
Finally,  country-level regressions reveal significant dollar  pass-through to for -
eign consumer and producer prices that increases with countries’ dollar invoicing 
share in imports. Earlier work by Gopinath (2015) provides  back-of-the-envelope 
calculations of dollar exchange rate spillovers on foreign consumer and producer 
prices based on estimated  country-level import price  pass-through and the import 
content of consumption. We take a more direct approach and regress countries’ CPI 
or PPI on the dollar exchange rate as well as its interaction with the dollar invoicing 
share in imports using a specification with country and time fixed effects, detailed in 
online Appendix Section A.2.2. We find the average  pass-through of the dollar into 
CPI (respectively, PPI) to be 11 percent (respectively, 28 percent) within the year, 
and is higher for countries with a higher dollar invoicing share of imports.
Figure 8. Response of Rest-of-World Aggregate Trade to US$ Appreciation, 2005–2015
Notes: Impulse responses of  rest-of-world aggregate trade volume to a 1 percent US dollar appreciation against 
all other currencies, holding constant all other exchange rates and the global business cycle. Panel A, unweighted 
regression; panel B,  trade-weighted. Error bars: 95 percent confidence intervals, clustering by dyad.
−1
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−1
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
0 1 2
Panel A. Unweighted
Panel B. Trade-weighted
Cumulative response to
1 percent shock, percent
Cumulative response to
1 percent shock, percent
Years after shock

===== PAGE 32 =====

708
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW MARCH 2020
G. Robustness
Our results are robust to many different variations, some of which have already been 
mentioned in previous sections alongside the description of our benchmark results and 
summarized here. First, our results are robust when considering trade flows within/
across advanced or emerging market economies (see online Appendix Section A.2.1).  
In particular, our results are not limited to flows involving emerging markets.
Second, our results are robust to excluding the global financial crisis. Online 
Appendix Section A.2.5 documents that our headline results are not driven by 
the global financial crisis starting in 2008. The estimated average exchange rate 
 pass-through and trade elasticity computed on the 1992–2007 sample are almost 
identical to our baseline Figures 4 and 6. When computing the effect of a uniform 
US dollar appreciation on  rest-of-world trade as in Section IIF, we find even stronger 
effects during the  precrisis period 2002–2007.
Third, online Appendix Section A.2.3 shows that the euro exchange rate is much 
less quantitatively important than the dollar exchange rate in price and volume 
regressions. Lastly, online Appendix Section A.2.4 shows that the large negative 
predictive effect of a dollar appreciation on world trade is robust to further con-
trolling for the exchange rates of the Swiss franc and Japanese yen.
III. Firm-Level Empirical Evidence
We now move from aggregate bilateral data on trade volume and value to firm-
level customs data on exports and imports for a small open economy, Colombia. 
While the global evidence has the virtue of covering 91 percent of world trade, 
it lacks granularity and the indices are at the annual frequency. To assuage any 
concerns that our findings may be contaminated by composition effects this sec-
tion demonstrates that the findings in Section II hold when we define prices and 
quantities at the  firm-10-digit  product-country ( origin or destination) -quarter (or 
-year) level. In addition we show that the DCP model matches the dynamic path 
of price  pass-through in the data unlike the competing paradigms. The details of 
the Colombian data ( DANE 2015, DIAN 2015)  are relegated to online Appendix 
Section A.3.
The Colombian currency (peso) is a commodity currency and fluctuations in its 
value are strongly negatively correlated with fluctuations in commodity prices. 20 
Figure 9 displays the relation between the Colombian peso (peso price of the dollar, 
solid line) and the overall (log)  terms-of-trade (dashed line), defined as the log dif-
ference between import and export prices. This  terms-of-trade is driven primarily by 
commodity prices. The correlation between the two series is 0.62 and a regression 
of the overall terms-of-trade on the peso/dollar exchange rate yields a coefficient 
on the exchange rate of 1.15 (  R   2   of 0.38). If we focus instead on the  noncommodity 
 terms-of-trade ( dots-and-dash line) we find that the  terms-of-trade is far more stable 
20 The Colombian peso officially switched to a floating status in 1999. Commodity prices can be considered as 
exogenous to the economy: while mining output makes up 58.4 percent of total exports for Colombia, it is small 
relative to world commodity markets. For example, Colombia’s oil production was 1.1 percent of world oil pro-
duction in 2014.

===== PAGE 33 =====

709
GOPINATH ET AL.: DOMINANT CURRENCY PARADIGMVOL. 110 NO. 3
with a regression coefficient of 0.33 (  R   2   of 0.36), consistent with the predictions of 
the model under DCP.21
In the rest of our empirical analysis we focus on manufactured goods, consistent 
with the approach in Section II, excluding products in the petrochemicals and basic 
metals industries. We follow the ISIC Rev. 3.1 classification to define which prod-
ucts are manufactures.22
A. Results
We estimate the same  pass-through regression of exchange rates into import and 
export prices ( measured in pesos)  as in equation ( 21), omitting interaction terms 
and time effects, since the latter would absorb the dollar exchange rate. We include 
 firm-industry-country fixed effects, which subsume dyad fixed effects, as well as quar-
ter dummies to account for seasonality.23 We add the contemporaneous effect and eight 
lags of the quarterly log change in the nominal exchange rate of the peso relative to the 
dollar regardless of origin or destination country. The cumulative estimates   ∑ s=0  k    β s    
and two standard error bands with standard errors clustered at the  quarter-year level 
are plotted in Figure 10. It reports the  pass-through into export and import prices (col-
umns) to/from dollarized and  non-dollarized countries (rows).
21 The TOT(Manuf) is constructed by excluding “traditional” exports/imports such as oil, coal, metals, coffee, 
bananas, or flowers. Although it does not consist exclusively of manufactured goods, these represent more than 90 
percent of the basket.
22 As a robustness check we also use the subsample of differentiated products only (instead of the full set of 
manufactures presented) constructed using the classification of goods by Rauch (1999). This is available in online 
Appendix Section A.4.
23 We also estimate the regression controlling for contemporaneous and eight lags of quarterly log changes 
in the producer price index in Colombia and in the origin/destination country and our estimates are practically 
unchanged.
Figure 9. Exchange Rate and Terms-of-Trade for Colombia
Notes: Data from Banco de la República. TOT is calculated using the PPI of all imports and exports. TOT (Manuf) 
is calculated using the PPI for “ non-traditional” imports and exports, that exclude products such as oil, coal, and 
metals, and include mostly manufactured goods.
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
2005:III 2008:I 2010:III 2013:I 2015:III
ER TOT (Manuf) TOT

===== PAGE 34 =====

710
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW MARCH 2020
Consistent with DCP, all  pass-throughs start out close to one and decline slowly 
over time. This is the case for both export and import prices and for dollar and 
 non-dollar destinations/origins. In the case of export prices to dollar destinations 
the contemporaneous estimate is 0.84 and then the cumulative  pass-through slowly 
decreases after two years to 0.56. The estimates are similar in the case of  non-dollar 
destinations. In the case of import prices from dollar origins  pass-through is very 
high, around 1, and the cumulative effect declines to 0.8. For  non-dollar origins the 
estimated  pass-through starts at around 0.87 and decreases to 0.49 after two years.
The second set of regressions replicates the regressions in Section II by aggre-
gating data to the annual frequency (the unit of observation remains  firm-10-digit 
 product-country-origin/destination). The estimates are reported in Table 6 for the 
various specifications. The results  reconfirm the findings in Section II of the import-
ant role of the dollar in  pass-through regressions. Robustness checks are presented 
in online Appendix Section A.4.
Table 7 reports the results from annual quantity regressions. Starting with the dol-
larized economies, the  pass-through to export quantities is insignificantly different 
from zero. On the other hand, for imports from dollarized economies there is a pro-
nounced decline in quantities imported across all specifications. In the case of the 
 non-dollarized economies, the decline in imports is also significantly negative and, 
importantly, the relevant exchange rate is the peso/dollar exchange rates as opposed 
to the bilateral exchange rate. For exports we again have that the relevant exchange 
rate is the peso/dollar exchange rate.
Figure 10. Exchange Rate Pass-Through into Prices
Notes: Exchange rate pass-through into export and import prices, to/from dollarized and  non-dollarized economies. 
All regressions include  Firm-Industry-Country fixed effects and quarterly dummies. 95 percent confidence inter -
vals shown with standard errors clustered at the  quarter-year level. The sample includes all manufactured products 
excluding petrochemicals and basic metals industries. Dollarized economies include the United States, Puerto Rico, 
Panama, Ecuador, and El Salvador.  Non-dollarized economies include all other partners, except economies with 
currencies pegged to the dollar and Venezuela.
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0 2 4 6 8 0 2 4 6 8
Panel A. Export prices, dollarized destination Panel B. Import prices, dollarized origin
Panel C. Export prices, non-dollarized destination Panel D. Import prices, non-dollarized origin
Cumulative response to
1 percent shock, percent
Cumulative response to
1 percent shock, percent
Quarters after shock

===== PAGE 35 =====

711
GOPINATH ET AL.: DOMINANT CURRENCY PARADIGMVOL. 110 NO. 3
B. Matching Model and Data
In this section we simulate data for a small open economy calibrated to match 
the Colombian economy (denoted  H ) that trades with the dominant currency area 
(denoted  $  in this section) and the  rest of the world (denoted  R) . The model is iden-
tical to the one described in Section I except that we modify the budget constraint 
slightly to include shocks to oil earnings. Specifically the budget constraint takes 
the form:
    P j,t    C j,t   +   $j,t   (1 +  i  j,t−1  $  )   B  j,t  $   +  B j,t   =  W j,t   (h)   N j,t   (h)  +  Π j,t   +   $j,t    B  j,t+1  $  
 +   ∑ 
s′∈
    Q j,t   (s′)   B j,t+1   (s′)  +   $j,t    ζ t    ,
where   ζ t    is the dollar value of the endowment of oil. A decline in   ζ t    captures a 
decline in the price of oil. We capture the relation between    $H,t    and    RH,t    using the 
following reduced-form relation between the two real exchange rates (in logs):
(23)   e RH,t   +  p R,t   −  p H,t   = η ( e $H,t   +  p $,t   −  p H,t  )  +  ε R,t   .
In equation (23),   p i,t    denotes the (log) consumer price level in country  i ∈  {$, R}    
in its respective currencies,   ε R,t    captures idiosyncratic fluctuations in the  $ - R  
exchange rate while  η  captures the  comovement between the two real exchange rates. 
Table 6—Exchange Rate Pass-Through into Prices, Annual Data
Dollarized economies Non-dollarized economies
 Δ p H,t    Δ p H,t    Δ p H,t    Δ p H,t    Δ p H,t    Δ p H,t   
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Panel A. Exports
 Δ e iH,t   0.673 0.0616 0.523 0.0726
(0.0937) (0.0474) (0.120) (0.0452)
 Δ e $H,t   0.696 0.828 0.667 0.633
(0.0331) (0.0355) (0.0507) (0.0602)
PPI No Yes No No Yes Yes
R2 0.288 0.290 0.303 0.305 0.308 0.310
Observations 169,792 159,041 206,226 206,226 139,318 139,318
Panel B. Imports
 Δ e iH,t   0.750 0.315 0.506 0.275
(0.116) (0.0777) (0.127) (0.0837)
 Δ e $H,t   0.977 1.007 0.528 0.534
(0.0177) (0.0309) (0.0650) (0.0510)
PPI No Yes No No Yes Yes
R2 0.225 0.225 0.287 0.290 0.291 0.293
Observations 529,584 529,260 931,993 931,993 808,304 808,304
Notes: All regressions include Firm-Industry-Country fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the year level. The 
sample includes all manufactured products excluding petrochemicals and basic metals industries. The results are 
robust to the inclusion of the peso/euro exchange rate as a potential alternative dominant currency, and to the inclu-
sion of two  Δ ER lags. If we limit the sample to differentiated products only, results are qualitatively unchanged.

===== PAGE 36 =====

712
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW MARCH 2020
With this flexible specification, we can explore separately how fluctuations in    $H,t    
and    RH,t    impact prices and quantities in  H , under different pricing paradigms.24
The model therefore features three sources of fluctuations: productivity shocks   a t   , 
endowment shocks   ζ t    that capture the exogenous fluctuations in the price of oil, and 
exogenous shocks to the  $ - R  exchange rate   ε R,t   . These shocks follow autoregressive 
processes:
(24)   ζ t   −  ζ 
–
  =  ρ ζ   ( ζ t−1   −  ζ 
–
 )  +  ϵ ζ,t   ,
(25)   a t   =  ρ a    a t−1   +  ϵ a,t   ,
(26)   ε R,t   =  ρ R    ε R,t−1   +  ϵ R,t    ,
where   ζ 
–
   is the steady-state value of the commodity price, and   ϵ ζ,t    are serially inde-
pendently distributed innovations. We allow the productivity and commodity price 
innovations to be correlated, and denote   ρ a,ζ   = corr ( ϵ a,t  ,  ϵ ζ,t  )  .
We use a combination of calibration and estimation to parameterize the model, 
the details of which are provided in online Appendix Section A.5. We match several 
moments in the data, including price  pass-through regression coefficients as well as 
estimated parameters in the time series processes for Colombia’s real exchange rate, 
24 An alternative  setup would be to allow for the small open economy to borrow internationally in both  $  
and  R  currencies. Then, even if interest rates in the  $  and  R  do not change, shocks that drive a wedge in the UIP 
conditions (commonly used to capture  risk premia shocks) for each of the two currencies will generate fluctuations 
in    $H,t  /  RH,t   .
Table 7—Trade Elasticity with Respect to Exchange Rate, Annual Data
Dollarized Non-dollarized
 Δ y H,t    Δ y H,t    Δ y H,t   
(1) (2) (3)
Panel A. Exports
 Δ e iH,t   −0.763 −0.0553
(0.212) (0.314)
 Δ e $H,t   −0.425 −1.007
(0.370) (0.322)
Euro ER Yes No Yes
R2 0.225 0.250 0.245
Observations 159,041 139,318 120,316
Panel B. Imports
 Δ e iH,t   −0.703 −0.319
(0.217) (0.246)
 Δ e $H,t   −0.959 −0.922
(0.407) (0.245)
Euro ER Yes No Yes
R2 0.184 0.236 0.254
Observations 529,276 808,409 519,002
Notes: All regressions control for PPI, importer GDP, and Firm-Industry-Country fixed effects. 
Standard errors clustered at the year level. See also caption for Table 6.

===== PAGE 37 =====

713
GOPINATH ET AL.: DOMINANT CURRENCY PARADIGMVOL. 110 NO. 3
value added, and commodity prices. The estimated model is very close to DCP. The 
export invoicing shares for Colombia are measured in the data directly and is 100 per-
cent for exports to  $  and 93 percent for exports to  R . The estimated import invoicing 
shares are 100 percent for imports from  $  and 93 percent for those from  R . We sim-
ulate the parametrized model and plot the  pass-through estimates from the estimated 
model, and counterfactual DCP, PCP, and LCP models against the estimates from the 
data. In the case of the latter three we force the invoicing shares to take the extreme 
values of each of the paradigms, keeping all other parameter values unchanged.
Dynamics of  Pass-Through: Figure 11 reports the values for price  pass-through 
for dollar destinations and Figure 12 for  non-dollar destinations. In each fig-
ure, export price  pass-through are reported in the left column, and import price 
 pass-through in the right column. Each row corresponds to a different model: the 
estimated model (top row), a full DCP counterfactual (second row), a PCP coun-
terfactual (third row), and a LCP counterfactual (last row). Large solid circles for 
the  pass-through of export and import prices to/from various destinations at impact 
represent values that were used in moment matching. The  pass-through at other lags 
were not used in estimating parameters.
As is evident, the estimated model replicates the  pass-through estimates at various 
lags for export prices to  $  and  R  and for import prices from  $  quite closely. While 
the match is less good for import prices from  R , we still obtain that  pass-through 
starts high and declines gradually. Inspecting the different rows, it is immediate that 
the estimated model is very close to DCP, and very different from a PCP or LCP 
counterfactual. PCP implies low initial  pass-through into export prices, which then 
gradually increases over time, as prices are sticky in the exporting currency. LCP 
implies low  pass-through into import prices, which then increases over time, as 
prices are sticky in the importing currency. In the case of  non-dollar trading partners 
we similarly observe that DCP outperforms both PCP and LCP.
Relevance of Bilateral Exchange Rates:  The estimated model also matches the 
empirical fact that bilateral exchange rates show up as large and significant when 
they are the only exchange rate control in price or quantity regressions (for  non-dollar 
destinations and origins), but drop significantly as a predictor of prices once the dol-
lar exchange rate is also included in the specification. This is reported in Table 8 for 
price  pass-through regressions and in Table 9 for trade elasticity regressions.25 The 
estimated model generates a weak expansion in exports to  $  destinations following a 
depreciation and a more pronounced contraction in imports from both  $  and  R  con-
sistent with the empirical evidence in Table 7. Exports to  R  are negatively impacted 
by depreciations relative to the dollar. Here again the dollar exchange rate is a major 
predictor of quantities for  non-dollar regions.
Importance of  Nonzero  α  and  Γ : Finally, Figure 13 explores the role of stra-
tegic complementarities in pricing and imported input use in production for our 
results. It contrasts the  pass-through estimates when  Γ  (the markup elasticity) and  α  
25 Online Appendix Section A.5 documents that PCP and LCP are unable to match these facts.

===== PAGE 38 =====

714
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW MARCH 2020
(the intermediate input share) are both set to 0 relative to the benchmark of  Γ = 1  
and  α = 2/3  (dashed line). This imposes constant  markups and a production func-
tion with labor only. The left column reports the dynamic  pass-through of export 
prices, and the right column that of import prices. The top row reports export and 
import prices to/from  $  and the bottom row to/from  R . Export price  pass-through 
into  H  prices declines by one-half at the one-year horizon when  Γ  and  α  are both set 
Figure 11. Exchange Rate Pass-Through for Dollar Origin/Destination: Data versus Model
Note: Exchange rate  pass-through into export and import prices for Colombia with respect to dollar economies.
0
0.5
1
0 2 4 6 8 0 2 4 6 8
Panel A. Estimated model, export prices Panel B. Estimated model, import prices
Panel C. DCP, export prices Panel D. DCP, import prices
Panel E. PCP, export prices Panel F. PCP, import prices
Panel G. LCP, export prices Panel H. LCP, import prices
Data Model
Cumulative response to
1 percent shock, percent
0
0.5
1
Cumulative response to
1 percent shock, percent
0
0.5
1
Cumulative response to
1 percent shock, percent
0
0.5
1
Cumulative response to
1 percent shock, percent
Quarters after shock

===== PAGE 39 =====

715
GOPINATH ET AL.: DOMINANT CURRENCY PARADIGMVOL. 110 NO. 3
equal to 0 (line with solid circles), compared to the data and the benchmark model 
predictions. In the case of import  pass-through the difference is smaller (as to be 
expected given that the marginal costs of foreign firms are taken as exogenous), but 
in all cases the model’s match with the data is the best under the benchmark specifi-
cation. Strategic complementarities in pricing and imported input use in production 
are important factors controlling the (slow) dynamic of price  pass-throughs.
0
0.5
1
0
0.5
1
0
0.5
1
0
0.5
1
0 2 4 6 8 0 2 4 6 8
Panel A. Estimated model, export prices Panel B. Estimated model, import prices
Panel C. DCP, export prices Panel D. DCP, import prices
Panel E. PCP, export prices Panel F. PCP, import prices
Panel G. LCP, export prices Panel H. LCP, import prices
Cumulative response to
1 percent shock, percent
Cumulative response to
1 percent shock, percent
Cumulative response to
1 percent shock, percent
Cumulative response to
1 percent shock, percent
Quarters after shock
Data Model
Figure 12. Exchange Rate Pass-Through for Non-Dollar Origin/Destination: Data versus Model
Note: Exchange rate  pass-through into export and import prices for Colombia with respect to  non-dollar economies.

===== PAGE 40 =====

716
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW MARCH 2020
IV . Conclusion
Most trade is invoiced in very few currencies. Building from this key observa-
tion, this paper presents a dominant currency paradigm characterized by three key 
features: pricing in a dominant currency, strategic complementarities in pricing, and 
imported input use in production. We integrate these new elements into a model of 
small or large open economies. The model is used to understand the consequences 
of home or dominant monetary policy shocks on exchange rates and fluctuations. 
The model predicts (i) stability in the  terms-of-trade; (ii) that the dollar (i.e., 
dominant) exchange rate dominates bilateral exchange rate in price  pass-through 
and trade elasticity regressions outside the United States; (iii) high and persistent 
 pass-through into export and import prices; (iv) that global trade outside the United 
States declines when the dollar appreciates.
We validate empirically these predictions using two sources of data. First, at the 
aggregate level, we use a newly constructed global bilateral trade dataset that covers 
91 percent of world trade. Then, we test the implications of the theory using micro-
data at the  firm-product-destination-year level from Colombia. All the key impli-
cations of the DCP are confirmed empirically, while other pricing paradigms are 
soundly rejected.
Looking forward, the dominant currency paradigm has striking implica-
tions for economic policy and its spillovers. For instance, we demonstrate that 
the  inflation-output  trade-off in response to a monetary policy shock is seriously 
impaired under DCP compared to the usual case of PCP. Monetary policy shocks 
in the dominant currency country also have strong spillovers to the rest of the 
world, while the converse is not true: the dominant currency country is largely insu-
lated from the inflationary consequences of fluctuations in its currency, which are 
absorbed instead into prices and trade in the rest of the world. This has important 
implications for monetary policy, which are explored at greater length in Casas et al. 
Table 9—Exchange Rate Pass-Through into Quantities: Estimated Model
 Δ y H$,t    Δ y $H,t    Δ y HR,t    Δ y RH,t   
(1) (2) (3) (4)
 Δ e $H,t   0.25 −1.52 −1.34 −1.07
 Δ e RH,t   −0.16 0.01 1.45 −0.38
Notes: Exchange rate pass-through into export and import quantities to/from dollarized and 
non-dollarized economies. Regressions have the bilateral exchange rate, the dollar exchange 
rate, and the level of demand as controls.
Table 8—Exchange Rate Pass-Through into Prices: Estimated Model
 Δ p HR,t    Δ p HR,t    Δ p RH,t    Δ p RH,t   
(1) (2) (3) (4)
 Δ e RH,t   0.70 0.27 0.67 0.22
 Δ e $H,t   0.67 0.70
Notes: Exchange rate pass-through into export and import prices to/from non-dollarized econ-
omies using model simulated data. Regressions have the bilateral exchange rate and the dollar 
exchange rate as controls.

===== PAGE 41 =====

717
GOPINATH ET AL.: DOMINANT CURRENCY PARADIGMVOL. 110 NO. 3
(2016). For instance, under DCP, a small open economy’s optimal monetary policy 
is no longer able to attain both zero producer price inflation and zero output gap in 
circumstances where producer currency pricing would.
Our framework takes the invoicing currency choice as given. Yet, we have been 
careful to point out that most of our results would hold even with endogenous cur -
rency invoicing. First, some ingredients from our model, namely imported input 
use in production and strategic complementarities in pricing, are precisely those 
that would give rise endogenously to dominant currency in pricing. This is demon-
strated by Gopinath, Itskhoki, and Rigobon (2010) in a partial equilibrium envi-
ronment and more recently by Mukhin (2018) in a general equilibrium setting. 
Second, Gopinath, Itskhoki, and Rigobon (2010) shows that firms choose to price in 
currencies in which their reset prices are most stable, i.e., the desired  medium-run 
 pass-through into prices (expressed in the invoicing currency) is low. In other words, 
our empirical findings will continue to be relevant in an environment with endoge-
nous currency choice.
Taking a step back, our paper confirms that the dominance of the US dollar is 
pervasive, from the structure of external balance sheets (Gourinchas and Rey 2014), 
the currency composition of private portfolios (Maggiori, Neiman, and Schreger 
2018), the choice of anchor currency (Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff 2017) and trade 
invoicing, with important and complex interactions which we are only starting to 
explore (e.g., Gopinath and Stein 2018).
Figure 13. Exchange Rate Pass-Through: Role of  α  and  Γ 
Notes: Exchange rate  pass-through into export and import prices to/from dollar ($) or  non-dollar (R) economies, 
for varying choices of  α  and  Γ .
0
0.5
1
0
0.5
1
0 2 4 6 8 0 2 4 6 8
Panel A. Price of exports to $ Panel B. Price of imports from $
Panel C. Price of exports to R Panel D. Price of imports from R
Cumulative response to
1 percent shock, percent
Cumulative response to
1 percent shock, percent
Quarters after shock
Data Γ = 1, α = 2/3 Γ = 0, α = 2/3 Γ = 0, α = 0

===== PAGE 42 =====

718
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW MARCH 2020
REFERENCES
Alessandria, George, Sangeta Pratap, and Vivian Yue. 2013. “Export Dynamics in Large Devalua-
tions.” International Finance Discussion Paper 1087.
Amiti, Mary, Oleg Itskhoki, and Jozef Konings. 2014. “Importers, Exporters, and Exchange Rate Dis-
connect.” American Economic Review 104 (7): 1942–78.
Amiti, M., Oleg Itskhoki, and Jozef Konings. 2019. “International Shocks, Variable Markups, and 
Domestic Prices.” Review of Economic Studies 86 (6): 2356–402.
Atkeson, Andrew, and Ariel Burstein. 2008. “Pricing-to-Market, Trade Costs, and International Rela-
tive Prices.” American Economic Review 98 (5): 1998–2031.
Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter K. Schott. 2009. “Importers, Exporters and Multi-
nationals: A Portrait of Firms in the U.S. that Trade Goods.” In Producer Dynamics: New Evidence 
from Micro Data, edited by Timothy Dunne, J. Bradford Jensen, and Mark J. Roberts, 513–52. Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press.
Betts, Caroline, and Michael B. Devereux. 2000. “Exchange Rate Dynamics in a Model of Pric-
ing-to-Market.” Journal of International Economics 50 (1): 215–44.
Boz, Emine, Eugenio Cerutti, and Evgenia Pugacheva. 2019. “Dissecting the Global Trade Slowdown: 
A New Database.” Unpublished.
Boz, Emine, Gita Gopinath, and Mikkel Plagborg-Møller. 2017. “Global Trade and the Dollar.” 
Unpublished.
Broda, Christian, and David E. Weinstein. 2006. “Globalization and the Gains from Variety.” Quar -
terly Journal of Economics 121 (2): 541–85.
Burstein, Ariel, and Gita Gopinath. 2014. “International Prices and Exchange Rates.” In Handbook of 
International Economics, V ol. 4, edited by Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth Rogoff, 
391–451. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Bussière, Matthieu, Guillaume Gaulier, and Walter Steingress. 2016. “Global Trade Flows: Revisiting 
the Exchange Rate Elasticities.” Banque de France Working Paper 608.
Canzoneri, Matthew, Robert Cumby, Behzad Diba, and David López-Salido. 2013. “Key Currency 
Status: An Exorbitant Privilege and an Extraordinary Risk.” Journal of International Money and 
Finance 37: 371–93.
Casas, Camila, Federico J. Díez, Gita Gopinath, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas. 2016. “Dominant 
Currency Paradigm.” Unpublished.
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 2011. “When Is the Government 
Spending Multiplier Large?” Journal of Political Economy 119 (1): 78–121.
Cook, David, and Michael B. Devereux. 2006. “External Currency Pricing and the East Asian Crisis.” 
Journal of International Economics 69 (1): 37–63.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Luca Dedola, and Sylvain Leduc. 2010. “Optimal Monetary Policy in Open 
Economies?” In Handbook of Monetary Economics, V ol. 3, edited by Benjamin M. Friedman and 
Michael Woodford, 861–933. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, and Paolo Pesenti. 2005. “The Simple Geometry of Transmission and Stabiliza-
tion in Closed and Open Economies.” NBER Working Paper 11341.
Departamento Administrativo Nacional de Estadística (DANE). 2005–2015. Accessed August 2019.
Devereux, Michael B., and Charles Engel. 2003. “Monetary Policy in the Open Economy Revisited: 
Price Setting and Exchange-Rate Flexibility.” Review of Economic Studies 70 (4): 765–83.
Devereux, Michael B., Kang Shi, and Juanyi Xu. 2007. “Global Monetary Policy under a Dollar Stan-
dard.” Journal of International Economics 71 (1): 113–32.
Dirección de Impuestos y Aduanas Nacionales (DIAN). 2000–2015. Accessed August 2019. 
Dornbusch, Rudiger. 1987. “Exchange Rates and Prices.” American Economic Review 77 (1): 93–106.
Feenstra, Robert C., Maurice Obstfeld, and Katheryn N. Russ. 2010. “In Search of the Armington 
Elasticity.” Unpublished.
Fleming, J. Marcus. 1962. “Domestic Financial Policies under Fixed and under Floating Exchange 
Rates.” Staff Papers (International Monetary Fund) 9 (3): 369–80.
Galí, Jordi. 2008. Monetary Policy, Inflation and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New 
Keynesian Framework. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Galí, Jordi, and Tommaso Monacelli. 2005. “Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate V olatility in a Small 
Open Economy.” Review of Economic Studies 72 (3): 707–34.
Goldberg, Linda S., and Cédric Tille. 2008. “Vehicle Currency Use in International Trade.” Journal of 
International Economics 76 (2): 177–92.
Goldberg, Linda S., and Cédric Tille. 2009. “Macroeconomic Interdependence and the International 
Role of the Dollar.” Journal of Monetary Economics 56 (7): 990–1003.

===== PAGE 43 =====

719
GOPINATH ET AL.: DOMINANT CURRENCY PARADIGMVOL. 110 NO. 3
Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou, and Michael M. Knetter. 1997. “Goods Prices and Exchange Rates: 
What Have We Learned?” Journal of Economic Literature 35 (3): 1243–72.
Gopinath, Gita. 2015. “The International Price System.” In Jackson Hole Symposium, V ol. 27. Federal 
Reserve Bank at Kansas City.
Gopinath, Gita, and Oleg Itskhoki. 2011. “In Search of Real Rigidities.” In NBER Macroeconomics 
Annual 2010, V ol. 25, edited by Daron Acemoglu and Michael Woodford, 261–309. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.
Gopinath, Gita, Oleg Itskhoki, and Roberto Rigobon. 2010. “Currency Choice and Exchange Rate 
Pass-Through.” American Economic Review 100 (1): 304–36.
Gopinath, Gita, and Brent Neiman. 2014. “Trade Adjustment and Productivity in Large Crises.” Amer-
ican Economic Review 104 (3): 793–831.
Gopinath, Gita, and Jeremy C. Stein. 2018. “Banking, Trade, and the Making of a Dominant Cur -
rency.” NBER Working Paper 24485.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Hélène Rey. 2014. “External Adjustment, Global Imbalances, Valua-
tion Effects.” In Handbook of International Economics, V ol. 4, edited by Gita Gopinath, Elhanan 
Helpman, and Kenneth Rogoff, 585–645. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Ilzetzki, Ethan, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2017. “Exchange Arrangements Enter-
ing the 21st Century: Which Anchor Will Hold?” NBER Working Paper 23134.
Imbens, Guido W., and Michal Kolesár. 2016. “Robust Standard Errors in Small Samples: Some Prac-
tical Advice.” Review of Economics and Statistics 98 (4): 701–12.
Itskhoki, Oleg, and Dmitry Mukhin. 2017. “Exchange Rate Disconnect in General Equilibrium.” 
NBER Working Paper 23401.
Johnson, Robert C. 2014. “Five Facts about Value-Added Exports and Implications for Macroeconom-
ics and Trade Research.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 28 (2): 119–42.
Johnson, Robert C., and Guillermo Noguera. 2012. “Accounting for Intermediates: Production Shar-
ing and Trade in Value Added.” Journal of International Economics 86 (2): 224–36.
Kimball, Miles S. 1995. “The Quantitative Analytics of the Basic Neomonetarist Model.” Journal of 
Money, Credit and Banking 27 (4): 1241–77.
Klenow, Peter J., and Jonathan L. Willis. 2016. “Real Rigidities and Nominal Price Changes.” Eco-
nomica 83 (331): 443–72.
Krugman, Paul. 1987. “Pricing to Market When the Exchange Rate Changes.” In Real-Financial Link-
ages among Open Economies, edited by Sven W. Arndt and J. David Richardson, 49–70. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kugler, Maurice, and Eric Verhoogen. 2009. “Plants and Imported Inputs: New Facts and an Interpre-
tation.” American Economic Review 99 (2): 501–507.
Leigh, Daniel, Weicheng Lian, Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro, and Viktor Tsyrennikov. 2015. “Exchange 
Rates and Trade Flows: Disconnected?” In World Economic Outlook: Adjusting to Lower Commod-
ity Prices, 105–42. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
Maggiori, Matteo, Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger. 2018. “International Currencies and Capital 
Allocation.” NBER Working Paper 24673.
Manova, Kalina, and Zhiwei Zhang. 2009. “China’s Exporters and Importers: Firms, Products and 
Trade Partners.” NBER Working Paper 15249.
Mukhin, Dmitry. 2018. “An Equilibrium Model of the International Price System.” Unpublished.
Mundell, R. A. 1963. “Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy under Fixed and Flexible Exchange 
Rates.” Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science 29 (4): 475–85.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 1995. “Exchange Rate Dynamics Redux.” Journal of Politi-
cal Economy 103 (3): 624–60. 
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2000. “New Directions for Stochastic Open Economy Mod-
els.” Journal of International Economics 50 (1): 117–53.
Rauch, James E. 1999. “Networks versus Markets in International Trade.” Journal of International 
Economics 48 (1): 7–35. 
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martín Uribe. 2003. “Closing Small Open Economy Models.” Journal 
of International Economics 61 (1): 163–85.
Svensson, Lars E. O., and Sweder van Wijnbergen. 1989. “Excess Capacity, Monopolistic Compe-
tition, and International Transmission of Monetary Disturbances.” Economic Journal 99 (397): 
785–805.
UN Comtrade. 2017. UN Comtrade Database. https://comtrade.un.org (accessed August 2017).