

===== PAGE 1 =====

Journal of Financial Economics 142 (2021) 550–571
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Financial Economics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec
Sustainable investing in equilibrium /p82
Ľ uboš Pástor a , c , d , e , Robert F. Stambaugh b , c , Lucian A. Taylor b , ∗
a University of Chicago, 5807 S. Woodlawn Ave., Chicago, IL 60637, USA
b University of Pennsylvania, 3620 Locust Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
c NBER, USA
d CEPR, United Kingdom
e National Bank of Slovakia, Slovakia
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 14 February 2020
Revised 1 May 2020
Accepted 14 May 2020
Available online 31 December 2020
JEL classiﬁcation:
G11
G12
Keywords:
Sustainable investing
Socially responsible investing
ESG
Social impact
a b s t r a c t
We model investing that considers environmental, social, and governance (ESG) criteria. In
equilibrium, green assets have low expected returns because investors enjoy holding them
and because green assets hedge climate risk. Green assets nevertheless outperform when
positive shocks hit the ESG factor, which captures shifts in customers’ tastes for green
products and investors’ tastes for green holdings. The ESG factor and the market portfolio
price assets in a two-factor model. The ESG investment industry is largest when investors’
ESG preferences differ most. Sustainable investing produces positive social impact by mak-
ing ﬁrms greener and by shifting real investment toward green ﬁrms.
©2 0 2 1 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Sustainable investing considers not only ﬁnancial objec-
tives but also environmental, social, and governance crite-
ria. This investment approach initially gained popularity by
imposing negative screens under the umbrella of socially
responsible investing (SRI), but its scope has expanded
/p82 The views in this paper are the responsibility of the authors, not the
institutions with which they are aﬃliated. We are grateful for comments
from our discussants Bernard Dumas, Harrison Hong, and Jacob Sagi,
and also from Rui Albuquerque, Malcolm Baker, George Constantinides,
Alex Edmans, Gene Fama, Sam Hartzmark, John Heaton, Ravi Jagannathan,
Ralph Koijen, Yrjo Koskinen, Stavros Panageas, Raghu Rajan, Jeff Wurgler,
and Josef Zechner; conference participants at the 2020 Spring NBER Asset
Pricing Meeting, the 2020 SFS Cavalcade, and the 2020 INSEAD Finance
Symposium; and seminar participants at the University of Chicago, Uni-
versity of Geneva, WU Vienna, and the National Bank of Slovakia.
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: luket@wharton.upenn.edu (L.A. Taylor).
signiﬁcantly in recent years. Assets managed with an eye
on sustainability have grown to tens of trillions of dollars
and seem poised to grow further. 1 Given this rapid growth,
the effects of sustainable investing on asset prices and cor-
porate behavior are important to understand.
We analyze both ﬁnancial and real effects of sus-
tainable investing through the lens of an equilibrium
model. The model features many heterogeneous ﬁrms and
agents, yet it is highly tractable, yielding simple and
intuitive expressions for the quantities of interest. The
model illuminates the key channels through which agents’
preferences for sustainability can move asset prices, tilt
1 According to the 2018 Global Sustainable Investment Review, sustain-
able investing assets exceeded $30 trillion globally at the start of 2018,
a 34% increase in two years. As of November 2019, more than 2600 or-
ganizations have become signatories to the United Nations Principles of
Responsible Investment (PRI), with more than 500 new signatories in
2018/2019, according to the 2019 Annual Report of the PRI.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2020.12.011
0304-405X/© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

===== PAGE 2 =====

Ľ . Pástor, R.F. Stambaugh and L.A. Taylor Journal of Financial Economics 142 (2021) 550–571
portfolio holdings, determine the size of the ESG invest-
ment industry, and cause real impact on society.
In the model, ﬁrms differ in the sustainability of their
activities. “Green” ﬁrms generate positive externalities for
society, “brown” ﬁrms impose negative externalities, and
there are different shades of green and brown. Agents dif-
fer in their preferences for sustainability, or “ESG prefer-
ences,” which have multiple dimensions. First, agents de-
rive utility from holdings of green ﬁrms and disutility from
holdings of brown ﬁrms. Second, agents care about ﬁrms’
aggregate social impact. In a model extension, agents addi-
tionally care about climate risk. Naturally, agents also care
about ﬁnancial wealth.
We show that agents’ tastes for green holdings affect
asset prices. Agents are willing to pay more for greener
ﬁrms, thereby lowering the ﬁrms’ costs of capital. Green
assets have negative CAPM alphas, whereas brown assets
have positive alphas. Consequently, agents with stronger
ESG preferences, whose portfolios tilt more toward green
assets and away from brown assets, earn lower expected
returns. Yet such agents are not unhappy because they de-
rive utility from their holdings.
The model implies three-fund separation, whereby each
agent holds the market portfolio, the risk-free asset, and
an “ESG portfolio” whose composition depends on assets’
greenness. Agents with stronger than average tastes for
green holdings deviate from the market largely by over-
weighting green assets and underweighting brown ones.
Agents with weaker ESG tastes deviate in the opposite
direction, and agents with average tastes hold the mar-
ket portfolio. If there is no dispersion in ESG tastes, all
agents simply hold the market. Even if all agents derive a
large amount of utility from green holdings, they neverthe-
less hold only the market if their ESG tastes are equally
strong, because asset prices then fully adjust to reﬂect
those tastes. For the ESG industry to exist, dispersion in
ESG tastes is necessary.
We deﬁne the “ESG factor” as a scaled return on the
ESG portfolio. We show that the ESG factor and the mar-
ket portfolio together price assets in a two-factor model.
Assets’ loadings on the ESG factor, their “ESG betas,” equal
their ESG characteristics: green assets have positive ESG
betas and brown assets have negative betas. A simple ver-
sion of the ESG factor is a green-minus-brown portfolio re-
turn, where both green and brown portfolios are weighted
by ESG characteristics. Assets’ CAPM alphas reﬂect expo-
sure to the omitted, priced ESG factor. The factor has a
negative premium that comes from investors’ ESG tastes.
We interpret the ESG factor as capturing unexpected
changes in ESG concerns. These concerns can change in
two ways: customers can shift their demand for goods of
green providers, and investors can change their appreci-
ation for green holdings. The ESG factor affects the rela-
tive performance of green and brown assets; its positive
realizations boost green assets while hurting brown ones.
If ESG concerns strengthen unexpectedly and suﬃciently,
green assets outperform brown ones despite having lower
expected returns.
To assess the model’s quantitative implications, we cal-
ibrate a setting with two types of investors: those sharing
equal concerns about ESG (“ESG investors”) and those hav-
ing no concerns (“non-ESG investors”). Given their portfo-
lios’ green tilts, ESG investors earn lower expected returns
than non-ESG investors. The difference in expected returns
increases with λ, the wealth share of ESG investors, and
with /Delta1, the maximum certain return ESG investors are
willing to forgo in exchange for investing in their desired
portfolio instead of the market. Non-ESG investors earn an
alpha that is positive and increasing in both λ and /Delta1. ESG
investors earn a negative alpha whose magnitude is in-
creasing in /Delta1, concave in λ, and greatest when the dis-
persion in ESG tastes is greatest (i.e., λ = 0 . 5 ).
Despite earning a negative alpha, ESG investors enjoy
an “investor surplus”: they sacriﬁce less return than they
are willing to in order to hold their desired portfolio. The
reason is that equilibrium asset prices adjust to ESG tastes,
thereby pushing the market portfolio toward the portfo-
lio desired by ESG investors. Speciﬁcally, ESG tastes make
green ﬁrms more valuable and brown ﬁrms less valuable.
The market portfolio thus moves closer to ESG investors’
desired portfolio, pushing those investors’ negative alpha
closer to zero. For example, when ESG investors have /Delta1=
4% , their alpha is at least −2 %. We deﬁne investor surplus
to be the difference between alpha and −/Delta1. The surplus is
always positive, ranging from /Delta1/ 2 to /Delta1.
We measure the size of the ESG investment industry by
the aggregate ESG dollar tilt away from the market port-
folio. The ESG industry is largest when the dispersion in
ESG tastes is greatest. In addition, the ESG industry’s size
is reduced by the price adjustment mentioned above. For
example, suppose that the ESG industry reaches 24% of the
stock market’s value when /Delta1is 1%. Then, doubling the
strength of ESG tastes by raising /Delta1to 2% increases that
maximum industry size by less than half, to 35% of the
market’s value.
Our model implies that sustainable investing leads to
positive social impact. We deﬁne a ﬁrm’s social impact as
the product of the ﬁrm’s greenness and its scale. We show
that agents’ tastes for green holdings increase ﬁrms’ so-
cial impact through two channels. First, ﬁrms choose to
become greener, because greener ﬁrms have higher mar-
ket values. Second, real investment shifts from brown to
green ﬁrms, due to shifts in ﬁrms’ cost of capital (up for
brown ﬁrms, down for green ﬁrms). We obtain positive ag-
gregate social impact even if agents have no direct prefer-
ence for it, shareholders do not engage with management,
and managers simply maximize market value.
Finally, we extend the model by allowing climate to
enter investors’ utility. Expected returns then depend not
only on market betas and investors’ tastes but also on
climate betas, which measure ﬁrms’ exposures to climate
shocks. Evidence suggests that brown assets have higher
climate betas than green assets (e.g., Choi et al., 2020; En-
gle et al., 2020 ). This difference pushes up brown assets’
expected returns in our model. The idea is that investors
dislike unexpected deteriorations in the climate. If the cli-
mate worsens unexpectedly, brown assets lose value rel-
ative to green assets (e.g., due to new government regu-
lation that penalizes brown ﬁrms). Because brown ﬁrms
lose value in states of the world investors dislike, they are
riskier, so they must offer higher expected returns. Brown
stocks thus have positive CAPM alphas not only because of
551

===== PAGE 3 =====

Ľ . Pástor, R.F. Stambaugh and L.A. Taylor Journal of Financial Economics 142 (2021) 550–571
investors’ distaste for brown holdings, but also because of
brown stocks’ larger exposures to climate risk.
Our theoretical treatment of climate risk is related to
recent empirical work on the implications of such risk for
asset prices. Hong et al. (2019) analyze the response of
food producers’ stock prices to climate risks. Bolton and
Kacperczyk (2019) conclude that investors demand com-
pensation for exposure to carbon risk in the form of higher
returns on carbon-intensive ﬁrms. Ilhan et al. (2020) show
that ﬁrms with higher carbon emissions exhibit more tail
risk and more variance risk. Engle et al. (2020) develop a
procedure to dynamically hedge climate risk by construct-
ing mimicking portfolios that hedge innovations in climate
news series obtained by textual analysis of news sources.
Bansal et al. (2016) identify climate change as a long-run
risk factor. Krueger et al. (2020) ﬁnd that institutional in-
vestors consider climate risk to be an important invest-
ment risk.
Besides climate risk, other aspects of ESG-related
risk have been studied. Hoepner et al. (2018) ﬁnd that
ESG engagement reduces ﬁrms’ downside risk as well
as their exposures to a downside-risk factor. Luo and
Balvers (2017) ﬁnd a premium for boycott risk. We com-
plement these studies with a theoretical contribution. We
construct an ESG risk factor that is capable of pricing as-
sets in a two-factor model, and we show that green and
brown assets have opposite exposures to this factor.
Prior studies report, in various contexts, that green
assets underperform brown assets. Hong and Kacper-
czyk (2009) ﬁnd that “sin” stocks (i.e., stocks of public
ﬁrms producing alcohol, tobacco, and gaming, which we
would classify as brown) outperform non-sin stocks. They
argue that social norms lead investors to demand com-
pensation for holding sin stocks. Barber et al. (2021) ﬁnd
that venture capital funds that aim not only for ﬁnan-
cial return but also for social impact earn lower returns
than other funds. They argue that investors derive non-
pecuniary utility from investing in dual-objective funds.
Baker et al. (2018) and Zerbib (2019) ﬁnd that green bonds
tend to be priced at a premium, offering lower yields than
traditional bonds. Both studies argue that the premium
is driven by investors’ environmental concerns. Similarly,
Chava (2014) and El Ghoul et al. (2011) ﬁnd that greener
ﬁrms have a lower implied cost of capital. All of these re-
sults are consistent with our prediction that ESG tastes re-
duce green ﬁrms’ costs of capital.
Some studies ﬁnd the opposite result, that green as-
sets outperform brown, using alternative deﬁnitions of
green and brown. Firms perform better if they are better-
governed, judging by employee satisfaction ( Edmans, 2011 )
or by strong shareholder rights ( Gompers et al., 2003 ),
or if they have higher ESG ratings in the 1992–2004 pe-
riod ( Kempf and Osthoff, 2007 ). These results are also con-
sistent with our model as long as ESG tastes strengthen
unexpectedly over the sample period. We do not mean
to imply that we can always declare empirical success
for our model. The model clearly predicts that green as-
sets underperform brown over a suﬃciently long period—
a period long enough that unexpected changes in ESG
tastes average to zero. We simply explain why it is
diﬃcult to distinguish ex ante versus ex post effects of ESG
concerns by looking at realized returns over periods dur-
ing which ESG tastes shift. Disentangling alphas from ESG
taste shifts is a major challenge for empirical work in this
area.
Our model is also related to previous theoretical stud-
ies of sustainable investing. Heinkel et al. (2001) build an
equilibrium model in which exclusionary ethical invest-
ing affects ﬁrm investment. They consider two types of
investors, one of which refuses to hold shares in pollut-
ing ﬁrms. The resulting reduction in risk sharing increases
the cost of capital of polluting ﬁrms, depressing their in-
vestment. Albuquerque et al. (2019) construct a model in
which a ﬁrm’s socially responsible investments increase
customer loyalty, giving the ﬁrm more pricing power. This
power makes the ﬁrm less risky and thus more valuable.
Unlike these models, ours features neither a lack of risk
sharing nor pricing power; instead, the main force is in-
vestors’ tastes for holding green assets.
Fama and French (2007) argue that tastes for holding
green assets can affect prices. Baker et al. (2018) build a
model featuring two types of investors with mean-variance
preferences, where one type also has tastes for green as-
sets. Their model predicts that green assets have lower ex-
pected returns and more concentrated ownership, and they
ﬁnd support for these predictions in the universe of green
bonds. Pedersen et al. (2021) consider the same two types
of mean-variance investors but also add a third type that
is unaware of ﬁrms’ ESG scores. This lack of awareness is
costly if ﬁrms’ ESG scores predict their proﬁts. The au-
thors show that stocks with higher ESG scores can have
either higher or lower expected returns, depending on the
wealth of the third type of investors. They obtain four-fund
separation and derive the ESG-eﬃcient frontier character-
izing the tradeoff between the ESG score and the Sharpe
ratio.
While the models in these studies share some features
with ours, we offer novel insights. We show that an ESG
factor, along with the market portfolio, prices assets in a
two-factor model. Positive realizations of this factor, which
result from shifts in customers’ and investors’ tastes, can
result in green assets outperforming brown. The size of
the ESG investment industry, as well as investors’ alphas,
crucially depend on the dispersion in investors’ ESG tastes.
ESG investors earn an investor surplus. We have a contin-
uum of investors with multiple dimensions of ESG prefer-
ences. Including climate in those preferences results in the
pricing of climate risk. Finally, ESG investing has positive
social impact.
Positive social impact also emerges from the model of
Oehmke and Opp (2020) , but through a different chan-
nel. Key ingredients to generating impact in their model
are ﬁnancing constraints and coordination among agents.
Our model does not include those ingredients, but it pro-
duces social impact nevertheless, through tastes for green
holdings. To emphasize these tastes, we do not model
shareholder engagement with management, which is an-
other channel through which ESG investing can poten-
tially increase market value (e.g., Dimson et al., 2015 ). In
our model, value-maximizing managers make their ﬁrms
552

===== PAGE 4 =====

Ľ . Pástor, R.F. Stambaugh and L.A. Taylor Journal of Financial Economics 142 (2021) 550–571
greener voluntarily, without pressure from shareholders,
because greener ﬁrms command higher market values. 2
Our assumption that some investors derive nonpe-
cuniary beneﬁts from green holdings has considerable
empirical support in the mutual fund literature. Mutual
fund ﬂows respond to ESG-salient information, such as
Morningstar sustainability ratings ( Hartzmark and Suss-
man, 2019 ) and environmental disasters ( Bialkowski and
Starks, 2016 ). Flows to SRI mutual funds are less volatile
than ﬂows to non-SRI funds ( Bollen, 2007 ) and less respon-
sive to negative past performance ( Renneboog et al., 2011 ).
Investors in SRI funds also indicate a willingness to forgo
ﬁnancial performance to accommodate their social prefer-
ences ( Riedl and Smeets, 2017 ).
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents
our baseline model. Section 3 discusses the ESG factor.
Section 4 explores the model’s quantitative implications.
Section 5 extends the baseline model by letting agents care
about the climate, showing that climate risk commands
a premium. Section 6 examines social impact. Section 7
concludes.
2. Model
The model considers a single period, from time 0 to
time 1, in which there are N ﬁrms, n = 1 , . . . , N. Let ˜ r n de-
note the return on ﬁrm n ’s shares in excess of the riskless
rate, r f , and let ˜ r be the N ×1 vector whose n th element
is ˜ r n . We assume ˜ r is normally distributed:
˜ r = μ + ˜ ϵ, (1)
where μ contains equilibrium expected excess returns and
˜ ϵ∼ N(0 , /Sigma1) . In addition to ﬁnancial payoffs, ﬁrms produce
social impact. Each ﬁrm n has an observable “ESG char-
acteristic” g n , which can be positive (for “green” ﬁrms)
or negative (for “brown” ﬁrms). Firms with g n > 0 have
positive social impact, meaning they generate positive ex-
ternalities (e.g., cleaning up the environment). Firms with
g n < 0 have negative social impact, meaning they generate
negative externalities (e.g., polluting the environment). In
Section 6 , we model ﬁrms’ social impact in greater detail.
There is a continuum of agents who trade ﬁrms’ shares
and the riskless asset. The riskless asset is in zero net sup-
ply, whereas each ﬁrm’s stock is in positive net supply.
Let X i denote an N ×1 vector whose n th element is the
fraction of agent i ’s wealth invested in stock n . Agent i ’s
wealth at time 1 is ˜ W 1 i = W 0 i
(
1 + r f + X ′
i ˜ r
)
, where W 0 i is
the agent’s initial wealth. Besides liking wealth, agents also
derive utility from holding green stocks and disutility from
holding brown stocks. 3 Each agent i has exponential utility
2 Theoretical work on sustainable investing also includes Friedman and
Heinle (2016) , Gollier and Pouget (2014) , and Luo and Balvers (2017) .
Bank and Insam (2017) do not mention sustainable investing, but they
model investors with preferences for other stock characteristics. Empiri-
cal work on sustainable investing includes Geczy et al. (2005) , Hong and
Kostovetsky (2012) , and Cheng et al. (2016) , among others. For recent ex-
perimental work, see Humphrey et al. (2020) . For surveys of the early
literature, see Bauer et al. (2005) and Renneboog et al. (2008) .
3 We frame the discussion in terms of green and brown stocks, but our
main ideas apply more broadly to any set of green and brown assets, such
as bonds and private equity investments.
V ( ˜ W 1 i , X i ) = −e −A i ˜ W 1 i −b ′
i X i , (2)
where A i is the agent’s absolute risk aversion and b i is
an N ×1 vector of nonpecuniary beneﬁts that the agent
derives from her stock holdings. Holding the riskless as-
set brings no such beneﬁt. The beneﬁt vector has agent-
speciﬁc and ﬁrm-speciﬁc components:
b i = d i g, (3)
where g is an N ×1 vector whose n th element is g n and
d i ≥ 0 is a scalar measuring the degree of agent i ’s “ESG
taste.” Agent i thus derives a nonpecuniary beneﬁt of d i g n
from holding stock n . Agents with higher values of d i have
stronger tastes for the ESG characteristics of their hold-
ings. In addition to having ESG tastes, agents care about
ﬁrms’ aggregate social impact, but that component of pref-
erences does not affect agents’ portfolio choices or asset
prices. Therefore, we postpone the discussion of that com-
ponent until Section 6.3 .
2.1. Expected returns
Due to their inﬁnitesimal size, agents take asset prices
(and thus the return distribution) as given when choosing
their optimal portfolios at time 0. To derive the ﬁrst-order
condition for X i , we compute the expectation of agent i ’s
utility in Eq. (2) and differentiate it with respect to X i . As
we show in the Appendix, agent i ’s portfolio weights on
the N stocks are
X i =
1
a i
/Sigma1−1
(
μ +
1
a i
b i
)
, (4)
where a i ≡ A i W 0 i is agent i ’s relative risk aversion. For
tractability, we assume that a i = a for all agents. We deﬁne
ω i to be the ratio of agent i ’s initial wealth to total initial
wealth: ω i ≡W 0 i /W 0 , where W 0 =
∫
i W 0 i di . Because we as-
sume a zero aggregate position in the riskless asset, mar-
ket clearing requires that w m , the N ×1 vector of weights
in the market portfolio of stocks, satisﬁes
w m =
∫
i
ω i X i di
=
1
a
/Sigma1−1 μ +
¯d
a 2 /Sigma1−1 g, (5)
where ¯d ≡
∫
i ω i d i di ≥ 0 is the wealth-weighted mean of
ESG tastes d i across agents and ι′ w m = 1 , with ι denoting
an N ×1 vector of ones. Note that ¯d > 0 unless the mass of
agents who care about ESG is zero. Solving for μ gives
μ = a /Sigma1w m −
¯d
a
g. (6)
Premultiplying by w ′
m gives the market equity premium,
μm = w ′
m μ:
μm = aσ2
m −
¯d
a
w ′
m g, (7)
where σ2
m = w ′
m /Sigma1w m is the variance of the market return.
In general, the equity premium depends on the average of
ESG tastes, ¯d , through w ′
m g, which is the overall “green-
ness” of the market portfolio. If the market is net green
( w ′
m g > 0 ), then stronger ESG tastes (i.e., larger ¯d ) reduce
553

===== PAGE 5 =====

Ľ . Pástor, R.F. Stambaugh and L.A. Taylor Journal of Financial Economics 142 (2021) 550–571
the equity premium. If the market is net brown ( w ′
m g < 0 ),
stronger ESG tastes increase the premium as investors de-
mand compensation for this brownness. For simplicity, we
assume that the market portfolio is ESG-neutral,
w ′
m g = 0 , (8)
which implies that the equity premium in Eq. (7) is in-
dependent of agents’ ESG tastes. Equivalently, we could
view g as being deﬁned so that agents derive utility (disu-
tility) from holdings that are greener (browner) than the
market. Eqs. (7) and (8) imply a = μm /σ2
m . Combining this
with Eq. (6) and noting that the vector of market betas is
βm = (1 /σ2
m )/Sigma1w m , we obtain our ﬁrst proposition.
Proposition 1 . Expected excess returns in equilibrium are
given by
μ = μm βm −
¯d
a
g. (9)
We see that expected excess returns deviate from their
CAPM values, μm βm , due to ESG tastes for holding green
stocks.
Corollary 1 . If ¯d > 0 , the expected return on stock n is de-
creasing in g n .
As long as the mass of agents who care about sustain-
ability is nonzero, ¯d is positive, and expected returns are
decreasing in ESG characteristics. Given their ESG tastes,
agents are willing to pay more for greener ﬁrms, thereby
lowering the ﬁrms’ expected returns. Because the vec-
tor of stocks’ CAPM alphas is deﬁned as α ≡ μ − μm βm ,
Eq. (9) yields the following corollary.
Corollary 2 . The CAPM alpha of stock n is given by
αn = −
¯d
a
g n . (10)
If ¯d > 0 , green stocks have negative alphas, and brown stocks
have positive alphas. Moreover, greener stocks have lower al-
phas.
As long as some agents care about sustainability,
Eq. (10) implies that the alphas of stocks with g n > 0 are
negative, the alphas of stocks with g n < 0 are positive, and
αn is decreasing with g n . Furthermore, the negative rela-
tion between αn and g n is stronger when risk aversion, a,
is lower and when the average ESG taste, ¯d , is higher. 4
Proposition 2 . The mean and variance of the excess return on
agent i ’s portfolio are
E ( ˜ r i ) = μm − δi
( ¯d
a 3 g ′ /Sigma1−1 g
)
(11)
Var ( ˜ r i ) = σ2
m + δ2
i
( 1
a 4 g ′ /Sigma1−1 g
)
, (12)
where δi ≡ d i − ¯d .
4 Proposition 1 and its corollaries continue to hold if agents disagree
on stocks’ ESG characteristics, g n . In that case, the results hold with g n
replaced by the wealth-weighted average of agents’ perceived values of
g n , adjusted for any covariance between those perceived values and ESG
tastes. See the Appendix.
Both equations are derived in the Appendix. Agents
with δi > 0 accept below-market expected returns in ex-
change for satisfying their stronger tastes for holding green
stocks. As a result, agents whose tastes for green holdings
are weaker ( δi < 0 ) enjoy above-market expected returns.
In departing from market holdings, all agents with δi ⁄ = 0
incur higher return volatility than that of the market port-
folio.
Corollary 3 . If ¯d > 0 and g ⁄ = 0 , agents with larger δi earn
lower expected returns.
Under the conditions of this corollary, the term in
parentheses in Eq. (11) is strictly positive. Therefore, agents
with stronger ESG tastes (i.e., larger δi ) earn lower ex-
pected returns. The effect of δi on E ( ˜ r i ) is stronger when
the average ESG taste is stronger (i.e., when ¯d is larger),
when risk aversion a is smaller, and when g ′ /Sigma1−1 g is larger.
The low expected returns earned by ESG-sensitive
agents do not imply that these agents are unhappy. As we
show in the Appendix, agent i ’s expected utility in equilib-
rium is given by
E
{
V ( ˜ W 1 i )
}
= ¯V e −
δ2
i
2 a 2 g ′ /Sigma1−1 g , (13)
where ¯V is the expected utility if the agent has δi = 0 . Ex-
pected utility is increasing in δ2
i (note from Eq. (2) that
¯V < 0 ), so the more an agent’s ESG taste d i deviates from
the average in either direction, the more ESG preferences
contribute to the agent’s utility.
2.2. Portfolio tilts and the ESG portfolio
Substituting for μ from Eq. (9) into Eq. (4) , we obtain
an agent’s portfolio weights:
Proposition 3 . Agent i ’s equilibrium portfolio weights on the
Ns t o c k s are given by
X i = w m +
(δi /a 2 )/Sigma1−1 g. (14)
Proposition 3 implies three-fund separation, as each
agent’s overall portfolio can be implemented with three as-
sets: the riskless asset, the market portfolio, and an “ESG
portfolio” whose weights are proportional to /Sigma1−1 g. The
fraction of agent i ’s wealth in the riskless asset, 1 − ι′ X i =
−
(δi /a 2 )ι′ /Sigma1−1 g, can be positive or negative. The agent’s
remaining wealth is invested in stocks. Speciﬁcally, the
agent allocates a fraction φi of her remaining wealth to the
ESG portfolio and a fraction 1 − φi to the market portfolio.
To see this, note that the N ×1 vector of weights within
agent i ’s stock portfolio, w i , equals the right-hand side of
Eq. (14) multiplied by 1 / (ι′ X i ) , giving
w i =
1
ι′
(
w m +
(δi /a 2
)/Sigma1−1 g
)(
w m +
(δi /a 2 )/Sigma1−1 g
)
= (1 − φi ) w m + φi w g , (15)
with the fraction of agent i ’s stock portfolio invested in the
ESG portfolio given by
φi =
(δi /a 2 ) ι′ /Sigma1−1 g
1 + (δi /a 2 ) ι′ /Sigma1−1 g
, (16)
554

===== PAGE 6 =====

Ľ . Pástor, R.F. Stambaugh and L.A. Taylor Journal of Financial Economics 142 (2021) 550–571
and the N ×1 vector of weights in the ESG portfolio given
by
w g =
1
ι′ /Sigma1−1 g
/Sigma1−1 g. (17)
In the special case where ι′ /Sigma1−1 g = 0 , no agent holds the
riskless asset, and the ESG portfolio is a zero-cost position,
with 5
w g = /Sigma1−1 g, (18)
and w i = X i , so that
w i = w m + φi w g , (19)
with φi then deﬁned as
φi = δi /a 2 . (20)
Denote the ESG portfolio’s greenness as
g g = w ′
g g. (21)
From Eqs. (17) and (18) , g g is nonzero as long as g ⁄ = 0 .
Also, g g is negative if ι′ /Sigma1−1 g < 0 , but it is otherwise pos-
itive. From Eqs. (16) through (20) , we see that φi has the
same sign as the product of g g and δi if the denominator of
φi in Eq. (16) is positive. From Eq. (14) , this last condition
obtains if agent i invests a positive fraction of her wealth
in stocks, so that ι′ X i > 0 .
Therefore, for an agent with positive wealth in stocks
and δi > 0 , φi is positive (negative) if g g is positive (nega-
tive). That is, such an agent in general tilts away from the
market portfolio in the direction of greenness, in that she
tilts toward the ESG portfolio when it is green and away
from it when it is brown. In contrast, agents with δi < 0
tilt away from the ESG portfolio when it is green and to-
ward it when it is brown. From Eq. (10) , the ESG portfolio’s
CAPM alpha is
αg = −
¯d
a
g g , (22)
whose sign is opposite that of g g . Therefore, for the same
agents described above, those with positive (negative) val-
ues of δi have ESG-portfolio tilts that produce negative
(positive) alphas for their overall portfolios.
The ESG tilt is zero (i.e., φi = 0 ) for agents with average
ESG concerns, i.e., for whom d i = ¯d and thus δi = 0 . Those
agents hold the market portfolio. In contrast, agents who
are indifferent to ESG, for whom d i = 0 and thus δi < 0 ,
tilt away from the market portfolio as explained above. It
is suboptimal to say, “I don’t care about ESG, so I just hold
the market.” In a world with ESG concerns, agents indif-
ferent to ESG should tilt away from the market portfolio;
otherwise they are not optimizing. The market portfolio is
optimal for agents with average concerns about ESG but
not for those indifferent to ESG.
If all agents have identical ESG concerns, so that δi = 0
for all i, then Eqs. (16) and (20) imply a zero ESG tilt for
each agent. We thus have the following corollary.
5 In the special case considered in Section 4 , in which ι′ /Sigma1−1 g = 0 and
/Sigma1has a two-factor structure, w g is proportional to g, so that the ESG
portfolio goes long green stocks and short brown stocks.
Corollary 4 . If there is no dispersion in ESG tastes across
agents, then all agents hold the market portfolio.
For example, all agents hold the market portfolio when
none of them have ESG concerns, as in the familiar CAPM.
All agents also hold the market, however, when they have
strong but equal ESG tastes. The reason is that stock prices
then fully adjust to reﬂect those tastes, again making
the market everybody’s optimal choice. Dispersion in ESG
tastes is necessary for an ESG investment industry to exist.
2.3. Two-factor pricing with the ESG portfolio
The excess return on the ESG portfolio is ˜ r g = w ′
g ˜ r . From
Eqs. (8) and (17) and βm = (1 /σ2
m )/Sigma1w m , the ESG portfolio’s
market beta is zero (i.e., w ′
g βm = 0 ). Premultiplying both
sides of Eq. (9) by w ′
g gives the expected excess return on
the ESG portfolio as
μg = −
¯d
a
g g , (23)
the same as its alpha in Eq. (22) . The variance of the ESG
portfolio’s return is
σ2
g =
( 1
ι′ /Sigma1−1 g
)
2 g ′ /Sigma1−1 g =
( 1
ι′ /Sigma1−1 g
)
g g , (24)
and the covariance of its return with the N assets is
Cov( ˜ r , ˜ r g ) =
( 1
ι′ /Sigma1−1 g
)
g . (25)
Deﬁne the vector of simple betas with respect to ˜ r g as βg =
(1 /σ2
g )Cov( ˜ r , ˜ r g ) . From Eqs. (24) and (25) ,
βg =
1
g g
g. (26)
By combining Eqs. (9) , (23) , and (26) , we relate expected
returns to betas on the market and the ESG portfolio:
Proposition 4 . Expected excess returns in equilibrium are
given by
μ = μm βm + μg βg . (27)
As noted earlier, the ESG portfolio is zero-beta, so that
Cov( ˜ r g , ˜ r m ) = 0 . Thus βm and βg are also the slope coef-
ﬁcients in the multivariate regression of ˜ r on ˜ r m and ˜ r g .
Therefore, using Eq. (27) , we have a two-factor asset pric-
ing model:
Proposition 5 . Excess returns obey the regression model
˜ r = βm ˜ r m + βg ˜ r g + ˜ ν, (28)
in which E ( ˜ ν| ˜ r m , ˜ r g , βm , βg ) = 0 and all assets have zero two-
factor alphas, equivalent to zero intercepts in the above re-
gression.
From Eqs. (9) , (10) , and (27) , the vector of CAPM alphas
is given by
α = βg μg (29)
= −( ¯d /a ) g. (30)
Eqs. (29) and (30) allow alternative interpretations of α.
On one hand, Eq. (29) offers a risk-based interpretation:
555

===== PAGE 7 =====

Ľ . Pástor, R.F. Stambaugh and L.A. Taylor Journal of Financial Economics 142 (2021) 550–571
The elements of βg represent exposures to the risky re-
turn ˜ r g , and μg is the expected return accompanying a
unit of that risk. In other words, one can attribute assets’
nonzero CAPM alphas to that omitted priced risk factor.
On the other hand, the only reason that investors expose
themselves to the risk in ˜ r g is that they have non-average
tastes for green and brown holdings. While the popular
risk-based interpretation of factor pricing models is me-
chanically valid, we see here an example of how that in-
terpretation can miss the underlying economics. The latter
are evident in Eq. (30) , which reveals that the sources of α
are tastes for known characteristics, g, not aversion to an
additional fundamental risk. In Section 5 , however, we ex-
tend our model to include an example of such risk, climate
shocks, and we discuss how g can also reﬂect exposures to
that risk.
3. The ESG factor
We next introduce an empirically identiﬁable ESG fac-
tor, closely related to the ESG portfolio, that maintains
two-factor pricing. After discussing approaches for con-
structing the ESG factor, we analyze its underlying eco-
nomic sources of risk. The latter analysis provides insights
into ex post versus ex ante performance of green stocks
relative to brown.
3.1. Constructing the ESG factor
We deﬁne the ESG factor as
˜ f g = (1 /g g ) ˜ r g , (31)
so that the traded factor ˜ f g is simply the excess return on
a position in the ESG portfolio, either long or short, lev-
ered or delevered, depending on the sign and value of g g .
Using Eq. (26) , we can then rewrite the two-factor model
in Eq. (28) as
˜ r = βm ˜ r m + g ˜ f g + ˜ ν. (32)
Assets’ loadings on the ESG factor, their ESG betas, are sim-
ply their ESG characteristics, g. A higher-than-expected re-
alization of ˜ f g boosts the returns on green stocks and de-
presses those on brown ones. From Eqs. (23) and (31) , the
ESG factor’s premium is negative:
E
{˜ f g
}
= − ¯d /a. (33)
One approach to constructing the ESG factor is to run a
cross-sectional regression of market-adjusted excess stock
returns, ˜ r e ≡ ˜ r − βm ˜ r m , on the stocks’ ESG characteristics,
g, with no intercept. The slope from that regression is
ˆ f g =
g ′ ˜ r e
g ′ g
, (34)
which from Eq. (32) has mean-zero estimation error ˆ f g −
˜ f g = g ′ ˜ ν/g ′ g. As N grows large, the probability limit of this
estimation error is zero as long as the covariance matrix
of ˜ ν has bounded eigenvalues and the cross-sectional sec-
ond moment of the elements of g is bounded below by
a positive value. The ESG factor is thus essentially just a
g-weighted average of market-adjusted stock returns. To
obtain the time series of the ESG factor’s realizations in
practice, one can run a series of such cross-sectional re-
gressions, period by period.
A simpler version of ˆ f g arises if we add the assump-
tions of g ′ ι = 0 and g ′ βm = 0 ; that is, if we assume that
not only the value-weighted average of g n ’s but also their
equal- and beta-weighted averages are zero (recall from
Eq. (8) that g ′ w m = 0 ). In this case, g ′ ˜ r e in Eq. (34) equals
g ′ ˜ r , so ˆ f g is just a scaled (by g ′ g) excess return on a zero-
cost portfolio whose weights are proportional to g. Simpli-
fying further, ˆ f g is proportional to the difference between
returns on green-stock and brown-stock portfolios:
ˆ f g ∝ ˜ r green − ˜ r brown , (35)
with the weights in the green (brown) portfolio propor-
tional to the positive (negative) elements of g. 6 A popu-
lar approach to constructing traded factors (e.g., Fama and
French, 1993 ) is to have them be excess returns on long-
short portfolios whose stock weights sum to zero. Our
model provides a formal justiﬁcation for such an ap-
proach in the context of ESG investing. However, unlike
in Fama and French (1993) , stocks in our ESG factor are
weighted by their g n ’s rather than by their market capital-
izations.
3.2. Sources of ESG factor risk
In this subsection, we extend our model from
Section 2 to identify potential sources of risk in the
ESG factor. The strength of ESG concerns can change
over time, both for investors in ﬁrms’ shares and for the
customers who buy the ﬁrms’ goods and services. If ESG
concerns strengthen, customers could shift their demands
for goods and services to greener providers (the “cus-
tomer” channel), and investors could derive more utility
from holding the stocks of greener ﬁrms (the “investor”
channel). Both channels contribute to the ESG factor’s risk
in our framework.
To model the customer channel, we need to model ﬁrm
proﬁts. Let ˜ u n denote the ﬁnancial payoff (proﬁt in our
one-period setting) that ﬁrm n produces at time 1, for each
dollar invested in the ﬁrm’s stock at time 0. We assume a
simple two-factor structure for the N ×1 vector of these
payoffs of the form
˜ u −E 0 { ˜ u } = ˜ z m βm + ˜ z g g + ˜ ζ, (36)
where E 0 { } denotes expectation as of time 0; the ran-
dom quantities ˜ z m , ˜ z g , and ˜ ζ have zero means and are
mutually uncorrelated; β′
m g = 0 ; and the elements of ˜ ζ
have identical variances and are uncorrelated with each
other. The shock ˜ z m can be viewed as a macro output
factor, with ﬁrms’ sensitivities to that pervasive shock
being proportional to their stocks’ market betas. The shock
˜ z g represents the effect on ﬁrms’ payoffs of unanticipated
ESG-related shifts in customers’ demands. These shifts
can result not only from changes in consumers’ tastes
but also from revisions of government policy. For exam-
ple, pro-environmental regulations could subsidize green
6 In Eq. (35) , the constant of proportionality is time invariant if g ′ g and
ι′ | g| both are.
556

===== PAGE 8 =====

Ľ . Pástor, R.F. Stambaugh and L.A. Taylor Journal of Financial Economics 142 (2021) 550–571
products, leading to more customer demand, or handicap
brown products, leading to less demand. A positive ˜ z g
shock increases the payoffs of green ﬁrms but hurts those
of brown ﬁrms.
To model the investor channel, we assume that the av-
erage ESG taste ¯d shifts unpredictably from time 0 to time
1. We therefore need to price stocks not only at time 0, as
we have done so far, but also at time 1, after the prefer-
ence shift in ¯d occurs. To make this possible in our simple
framework, we split time 1 into two times, 1 − and 1 + , that
are close to each other. We calculate prices p 1 as of time
1 −, by which time ESG tastes have shifted and all risk as-
sociated with ˜ u has been realized. Stockholders receive ˜ u
at time 1 + . During the instant between times 1 − and 1 + ,
these payoffs are riskless. For economy of notation, we as-
sume the risk-free rate r f = 0 .
There are two generations of agents, Gen-0 and Gen-1.
Gen-0 agents live from time 0 to time 1 −; Gen-1 agents
live from time 1 − to 1 + . Gen-1 agents have identical tastes
of d i = ¯d 1 , a condition that gives them ﬁnite utility, given
the absence of both risk and position constraints during
their lifespan. Neither a nor g change across generations. At
time 1 −, Gen-0 agents sell stocks to Gen-1 agents at prices
p 1 , which depend on Gen-1 ESG tastes ¯d 1 and the ﬁnancial
payoff ˜ u . This simple setting maintains single-period payoff
uncertainty while also allowing risk stemming from shifts
in ESG tastes to enter via both channels described earlier.
Given that the payoff ˜ u n is known at the time when
the price p 1 ,n is computed, p 1 ,n is equal to ˜ u n discounted
at the expected return implied by Eq. (9) with βm,n set to
zero:
p 1 ,n =
˜ u n
1 − g n
a
¯d 1
≈ ˜ u n +
g n
a
¯d 1 . (37)
The approximation above holds well for typical discount
rates, which are not too far from zero. 7 Representing it as
an equality for all assets gives
p 1 = ˜ u +
1
a
¯d 1 g, (38)
which is the vector of payoffs to Gen-0 agents. Its expected
value at time 0 equals
E 0 { p 1 } = E 0 { ˜ u } +
1
a
E 0 { ¯d 1 } g. (39)
Note that p 1 −E 0 { p 1 } equals the vector of unexpected
returns for Gen-0 agents, because ˜ u n is the ﬁrm’s pay-
off per  dollar invested in its stock at time 0. From
Eqs. (36) through (39) , these unexpected returns are given
by
˜ r −E 0 { ˜ r } = βm ˜ z m + g ˜ f e
g + ˜ ζ (40)
with
˜ f e
g = ˜ z g +
1
a
[¯d 1 −E 0 { ¯d 1 }
]
. (41)
7 Let ρ1 ≡ ˜ u n −1 and ρ2 ≡ g n
a ¯d 1 . The approximation in Eq. (37) follows
from 1+ ρ1
1 −ρ2 = (1+ ρ1 )(1+ ρ2 )
1 −ρ2
2 ≈ (1 + ρ1 )(1 + ρ2 ) ≈ 1 + ρ1 + ρ2 , where we as-
sume that the second-order terms ρ2
2 and ρ1 ρ2 are small enough to be
neglected. This assumption seems plausible because the magnitudes of ρ1
and ρ2 are comparable to discount rates. We rely on this approximation
in the remainder of Section 3 .
As shown in the Appendix, when N is large,
˜ f e
g ≈ ˜ f g −E 0 { ˜ f g } , (42)
where ˜ f g is the ESG factor deﬁned in Eq. (31) .
Eq. (41) therefore identiﬁes the two sources of risk in
the ESG factor discussed earlier: ˜ z g represents the cus-
tomer channel while the other term represents the in-
vestor channel. While the customer channel follows closely
from the structure assumed in Eq. (36) , the investor chan-
nel emerges from the equilibrium dependence of stock
prices on ¯d .
The elements of ˜ f e
g g in Eq. (40) drive a wedge between
expected and realized returns for Gen-0 agents. Suppose
that ESG concerns strengthen unexpectedly, so that ˜ f e
g > 0 .
A ﬁrm’s unexpected return in Eq. (40) is then expected to
be positive for green ﬁrms (for which ˜ f e
g g n > 0 ) and nega-
tive for brown ﬁrms (for which ˜ f e
g g n < 0 ), because the ex-
pected values of ˜ z m and ˜ ζ are both zero. In other words,
if ˜ ϵn denotes the unexpected return for stock n, E { ˜ ϵn | ˜ f e
g >
0 , g n > 0 } > 0 , and E { ˜ ϵn | ˜ f e
g > 0 , g n < 0 } < 0 . We thus have
the following proposition.
Proposition 6 . Green (brown) stocks perform better (worse)
than expected if ESG concerns strengthen unexpectedly via ei-
ther the customer channel or the investor channel.
As noted earlier, green stocks have lower expected re-
turns than brown stocks. A positive realization of ˜ f e
g , how-
ever, boosts the realized performance of green stocks while
hurting that of brown stocks. If one computes average re-
turns over a sample period when ESG concerns strengthen
more than investors expected, so that the average of ˜ f e
g
over that period is strongly positive, then green stocks
outperform brown stocks, contrary to what is expected.
Furthermore, if ESG concerns strengthen via the investor
channel, making d increase, then green stocks’ alphas are
more negative at the end of the period than the begin-
ning (see Corollary 2 ). In this case, past outperformance of
green stocks makes it especially likely that they will un-
derperform in the future.
To empirically distinguish alphas from unexpected
shocks, one could use proxies for shifts in ESG tastes. Prox-
ies for shifts in investors’ tastes could come from investor
surveys or from the ﬂows in and out of ESG-tilted funds.
Proxies for shifts in customers’ ESG tastes could come from
consumer surveys or from data on ﬁrm revenues or prof-
itability. With such proxies, one could test whether green
stocks outperform brown ones when either type of ESG
taste strengthens unexpectedly. In addition, one could at-
tempt to separate the effects of investors’ and customers’
tastes, because only shifts in investors’ tastes make green
stocks’ future alphas more negative after green stocks out-
perform.
4. Quantitative implications
To explore the model’s quantitative implications, we
consider a special case with two types of agents: ESG in-
vestors, for whom d i = d > 0 , and non-ESG investors, for
whom d i = 0 . ESG investors thus enjoy nonpecuniary bene-
ﬁts dg, whereas non-ESG investors receive no beneﬁts (see
557

===== PAGE 9 =====

Ľ . Pástor, R.F. Stambaugh and L.A. Taylor Journal of Financial Economics 142 (2021) 550–571
Fig. 1. ESG versus non-ESG expected portfolio return. This ﬁgure plots
the expected excess return on the portfolio of ESG investors mi-
nus the corresponding value for non-ESG investors. Results are plot-
ted against λ, the fraction of wealth belonging to ESG investors, and
for different values of /Delta1, the maximum certain return an ESG investor
would sacriﬁce to invest in her optimal portfolio instead of the market
portfolio.
Eq. (3) ). Let λ denote the fraction of total wealth belonging
to ESG investors, so that 1 − λ is the corresponding frac-
tion for non-ESG investors.
We further simplify the two-factor setting in Eq. (32) by
assuming that ν in Eq. (32) has a scalar covariance matrix,
η2 I N , where I N is the identify matrix. The covariance ma-
trix of ˜ r is therefore of the form
/Sigma1= σ2
m βm β′
m + σ2
f gg ′ + η2 I N . (43)
Recall that w ′
m g = 0 , which here implies ι′ g = 0 . We
assume that β′
m g = 0 , so that ESG characteristics are or-
thogonal to market betas. We also assume equal market
weights across stocks, w m = (1 /N) ι. Without loss of gener-
ality, we set (g ′ g) /N = 1 . In all calculations, we take limits
as the number of stocks, N, grows large.
4.1. Parameter values
In this simple setting there are only four parameters
whose numerical values are relevant to the initial set of
results we present: λ, a, σm , and /Delta1(deﬁned below).
We vary λ over its entire [0 , 1] range. We set σm = 0 . 20 ,
roughly the historical standard deviation of the market
portfolio’s excess return. Following Eq. (7) , we then set
a = μm /σ2
m with μm = 0 . 08 , roughly the market’s histori-
cal mean excess return. 8
8 Identifying σ2
m in Eq. (43) as the market variance is justiﬁed for large
N. If we instead denote that variance as simply σ2 , note that the implied
variance of the market, w ′
m /Sigma1w m , is
σ2
m = 1
N 2 ι′ (σ2 βm β′
m + σ2
f gg ′ + η2 I N
)ι = σ2 + η2
N , (44)
noting w ′
m βm = (1 /N) ι′ βm = 1 and recalling ι′ g = 0 , so we simply set
σ2 = σ2
m , the limit as N grows large.
Rather than calibrating d, we translate it to a more eas-
ily interpreted quantity, /Delta1. We deﬁne /Delta1as the maximum
rate of return that an ESG investor is willing to sacriﬁce,
for certain, to invest in her desired portfolio rather than in
the market portfolio. The sacriﬁce is greatest when there
are no other ESG investors, i.e., when λ ≈ 0 , because that
is when the ESG investor’s portfolio most differs from
the market portfolio. Speciﬁcally, we deﬁne /Delta1≡ r ∗
esg −r ∗
m ,
where r ∗
esg is the ESG investor’s certainty equivalent excess
return when investing in her optimal portfolio, and r ∗
m is
the same investor’s corresponding certainty equivalent if
forced to hold the market portfolio instead. Both certainty
equivalents are computed for λ = 0 . In this setting,
/Delta1=
d 2 g g
2 a 3 , (45)
as shown in the Appendix, along with the expressions for
r ∗
esg and r ∗
m . Note that /Delta1is larger under stronger ESG tastes
(larger d), lower risk aversion (smaller a ), and a greener
ESG portfolio (larger g g ). We consider four values of /Delta1:
1%, 2%, 3%, and 4% per year.
4.2. ESG versus non-ESG expected portfolio returns
The difference in expected excess returns on the port-
folios of the two investor types is
E { ˜ r esg } −E { ˜ r non } = −2 λ/Delta1, (46)
as shown in the Appendix. Fig. 1 plots this difference as
λ goes from zero to one. The difference is zero at λ = 0 ,
but it declines linearly as λ increases. At λ = 1 , ESG tastes
are fully reﬂected in prices, and the difference reaches its
largest magnitude. In that scenario, the difference is −2 %
when /Delta1= 0 . 01 , but it is −8 % when /Delta1= 0 . 04 . ESG in-
vestors thus earn signiﬁcantly lower returns than non-ESG
investors when the former account for a larger fraction of
wealth (larger λ) and when they have stronger ESG de-
mands (larger /Delta1). In both scenarios, ESG tastes exert large
effects on asset prices, hurting ESG investors’ returns.
The certainty equivalent returns of the two types, r ∗
esg
for ESG investors and r ∗
non for non-ESG investors, are both
increasing in /Delta1, but r ∗
esg decreases with λ whereas r ∗
non
increases with λ, as we show in the Appendix. As λ in-
creases, stock prices are affected more by ESG investors’
tastes, so these investors must pay more for the green
stocks they desire. The resulting drop in r ∗
esg need not im-
ply, however, that an ESG investor is made less happy by
an increased presence of ESG investors. With the latter,
there is also greater social impact of ESG investing, as we
discuss in Section 6 . The additional utility that the ESG in-
vestor derives from the greater social impact, as in Eq. (68) ,
can exceed the drop in utility corresponding to the lower
r ∗
esg . Non-ESG investors, on the other hand, do prefer to
be lonely in their ESG tastes. A non-ESG investor is hap-
piest when all other investors are ESG ( λ = 1 ), because
that scenario maximizes deviations of prices from pecu-
niary fundamentals, which the non-ESG investor exploits
to her advantage. This investor’s preference for loneliness
in ESG tastes is even stronger if she derives utility from
social impact, because that impact is maximized when
λ = 1 .
558

===== PAGE 10 =====

Ľ . Pástor, R.F. Stambaugh and L.A. Taylor Journal of Financial Economics 142 (2021) 550–571
Fig. 2. Correlation of ESG investor’s portfolio return with the market re-
turn. The ﬁgure plots the correlation between the returns on the ESG in-
vestor’s portfolio and the market portfolio. Results are plotted against λ,
the fraction of wealth belonging to ESG investors, and for different val-
ues of /Delta1, the maximum certain return an ESG investor would sacriﬁce to
invest in her optimal portfolio instead of the market portfolio.
4.3. Correlation between the ESG return and the market
return
The correlation between the return on an ESG investor’s
portfolio and the return on the market portfolio is derived
in the Appendix:
ρ( ˜ r esg , ˜ r m ) =
σm √
σ2
m + 2/Delta1
a (1 − λ) 2
. (47)
Fig. 2 plots the value of ρ(
˜ r esg , ˜ r m
)
as λ goes from zero
to one. The correlation takes its lowest value at λ = 0 . For
/Delta1= 0 . 01 , that value is nearly 0.9, whereas for /Delta1= 0 . 04 ,
it is just over 0.7. As /Delta1increases, indicating that ESG
investors feel increasingly strongly about ESG, those in-
vestors’ portfolios become increasingly different from the
market portfolio in terms of ρ(
˜ r esg , ˜ r m
)
, and this effect is
strongest when λ = 0 . However, as λ approaches one, so
does ρ(
˜ r esg , ˜ r m
)
. When ESG investors hold an increasingly
large fraction of wealth, market prices adjust to their pref-
erences, and all portfolios converge to the market portfolio.
4.4. Alphas and the investor surplus
The alphas of the ESG and non-ESG investors’ portfolios
are derived in the Appendix:
αesg = −2 λ(1 − λ)/Delta1 (48)
αnon = 2 λ2 /Delta1. (49)
Panel A of Fig. 3 plots αesg as λ goes from zero to
one. ESG investors earn zero alpha at both extremes of
λ. Their portfolio differs most from the market portfo-
lio when λ = 0 , but all stocks have zero alphas in that
scenario, because there is no impact of ESG investors on
prices. At the other extreme, when λ = 1 , many stocks
have nonzero alphas, due to the price impacts of ESG in-
vestors, but ESG investors hold the market, so again they
earn zero alpha. Otherwise, ESG investors earn negative al-
pha, which is greatest in magnitude when λ = 0 . 5 . At that
peak, αesg = −0 . 5 % when /Delta1= 0 . 01 , but αesg = −2 % when
/Delta1= 0 . 04 .
Interestingly, these worst-case alphas are substantially
smaller in magnitude than the corresponding /Delta1’s. For ex-
ample, when ESG investors are willing to give up a 2% cer-
tain return to hold their portfolio rather than the market
(i.e., /Delta1= 0 . 02 ), their worst-case alpha is only −1 %. The
reason is that equilibrium stock prices adjust to ESG de-
mands. These demands push the market portfolio toward
the portfolio desired by ESG investors, thereby bringing
those investors’ negative alphas closer to zero. Through
this adjustment of market prices, ESG investors earn an
“investor surplus” in that they do not have to give up as
much return as they are willing to in order to hold their
desired portfolio.
The magnitude of this investor surplus is easy to read
from Panel B of Fig. 3 , which plots αesg as a function of
/Delta1. For any given value of λ, investor surplus is the differ-
ence between the corresponding solid line and the dashed
line, which has a slope of −1 . The surplus increases with
/Delta1because the stronger the ESG investors feel about green-
ness, the more they move market prices. The relation be-
tween the surplus and λ is richer. Formally, investor sur-
plus I ≡ αesg + /Delta1follows quickly from Eq. (48) :
I = /Delta1[1 −2 λ(1 − λ)] . (50)
Because 0 ≤ λ ≤ 1 , the value in brackets is always between
0.5 and 1, so I is always between /Delta1/ 2 and /Delta1. It reaches its
smallest value of /Delta1/ 2 when λ = 0 . 5 and its largest value of
/Delta1when λ = 0 or 1. For example, when /Delta1= 0 . 02 , I ranges
from 1% to 2% depending on λ.
Fig. 4 plots αnon as a function of λ and /Delta1. Like ESG in-
vestors, non-ESG investors earn zero alpha when λ = 0 or
/Delta1= 0 . However, αnon increases in both λ or /Delta1. This alpha
can be as large as 8% when λ = 1 and /Delta1= 0 . 04 . A non-
ESG investor earns the highest alpha when all other in-
vestors are ESG (i.e., λ = 1 ) and when those investors’ ESG
tastes are strong (i.e., /Delta1is large) because the price impact
of ESG tastes is then particularly large. By overweighting
brown stocks, whose alphas are positive and large, and un-
derweighting green stocks, whose alphas are negative and
large, the non-ESG investor earns a large positive alpha.
Given our assumptions, the differences between the al-
phas plotted in Figs. 3 and 4 are equal to the differences
in expected returns plotted in Fig. 1 . Speciﬁcally, from
Eqs. (46) through (49) , αesg − αnon = E { ˜ r esg } −E { ˜ r non } .
4.5. Size of the ESG investment industry
We deﬁne the size of the ESG investment industry by
the aggregate amount of ESG-driven investment that devi-
ates from the market portfolio, divided by the stock mar-
ket’s total value. In general, this aggregate ESG tilt is given
by
T =
∫
i : d i > 0
ω i T i di, (51)
559

===== PAGE 11 =====

Ľ . Pástor, R.F. Stambaugh and L.A. Taylor Journal of Financial Economics 142 (2021) 550–571
Fig. 3. Alphas of ESG investors. This ﬁgure plots the alpha for the portfo-
lio held by ESG investors as a function of λ, the fraction of wealth belong-
ing to ESG investors, and /Delta1, the maximum certain return an ESG investor
would sacriﬁce to invest in her optimal portfolio instead of the market
portfolio. Panel A plots the ESG alpha as a function of λ for four different
values of /Delta1; Panel B ﬂips the roles of λ and /Delta1. The dashed line in Panel B
has a slope of −1 . The differences between the solid lines and the dashed
line represent investor surplus.
where
T i =
1
2
ι′ | w i −w m | . (52)
The aggregate ESG tilt, T , is a wealth-weighted average
of agent-speciﬁc tilts, T i , across all agents who care at
least to some extent about ESG (i.e., d i > 0 ). Each T i is
one half of the sum of the absolute values of the N el-
ements of agent i ’s ESG tilt, | w i −w m | . We compute ab-
solute values of portfolio tilts because ESG-motivated in-
vestors both overweight and underweight stocks relative
to the market. We divide by two because we do not want
to double-count: for each dollar that an agent moves into
a green stock, she must move a dollar out of another
stock.
With two types of agents, the expression for T simpli-
ﬁes to
T =
1
N
λ(1 − λ)
√
/Delta1
2 aσ2
f
ι′ | g| , (53)
Fig. 4. Alphas of non-ESG investors. This ﬁgure plots the alpha for the
portfolio held by non-ESG investors as a function of λ, the fraction of
wealth belonging to ESG investors, and /Delta1, the maximum certain return
an ESG investor would sacriﬁce to invest in her optimal portfolio instead
of the market portfolio. Panel A plots the ESG alpha as a function of λ for
four different values of /Delta1; Panel B ﬂips the roles of λ and /Delta1.
as we show in the Appendix. The aggregate tilt depends
on the absolute values of the elements of g. To eval-
uate ι′ | g| in this quantitative exercise, we further as-
sume that the elements of g are normally distributed
across stocks, in addition to the previous assumptions that
these elements have zero mean and unit variance (recall
ι′ g = 0 and (g ′ g) /N = 1 ). Then ι′ | g| = N E (| g n | ) = N
√
2 /π.
Therefore,
T = λ(1 − λ)
√
/Delta1
aπσ2
f
. (54)
For this analysis, we now need to specify the value of
one additional parameter, σ2
f , the standard deviation of the
ESG factor. We set σf = (0 . 2) σm , but the effect of this pa-
rameter is easily gauged from Eq. (54) . The more volatile
is the ESG factor, the more reluctant both ESG and non-
ESG investors are to tilt away from the market and thereby
560

===== PAGE 12 =====

Ľ . Pástor, R.F. Stambaugh and L.A. Taylor Journal of Financial Economics 142 (2021) 550–571
Fig. 5. Size of the ESG industry. The ﬁgure plots the aggregate dollar size
of ESG investors’ deviations from the market portfolio (the ESG “tilt”), ex-
pressed as a fraction of the market’s total capitalization. In Panel A, re-
sults are plotted against λ, the fraction of wealth belonging to ESG in-
vestors, and for different values of /Delta1, the maximum certain return an
ESG investor would sacriﬁce to invest in her optimal portfolio instead of
the market portfolio. In Panel B, results are plotted against /Delta1and for dif-
ferent values of λ.
expose themselves to the ESG factor’s risk. Higher risk
aversion (greater a ) also makes them more reluctant to do
so, but they tilt more when ESG investors have stronger
tastes (greater /Delta1).
Fig. 5 plots T for different values of λ and /Delta1. In Panel
A, λ goes from zero to one. At both λ = 0 and λ = 1 , we
have T = 0 because all investors hold the market portfolio.
Again, we see that dispersion in ESG tastes is needed for
an ESG investment industry to exist. The maximum value
of T in Eq. (54) always occurs at λ = 0 . 5 , the maximum of
λ(1 − λ) . In Panel B, /Delta1goes from 0 to 0.04. Larger values
of /Delta1produce larger values of T . This relation between /Delta1
and T is concave (see also Eq. (54) ). For example, the ESG
industry peaks at 35% of the stock market’s value when
/Delta1= 0 . 02 , but doubling the strength of ESG tastes (raising
/Delta1to 0.04) increases that maximum industry size by less
than half, to 50% of the market’s value. We see that the
price impact of ESG tastes weakens their impact on the
size of the ESG investment industry.
5. Climate risk
Sustainable investing is motivated in part by concerns
about climate change. Many experts expect climate change
to impair quality of life, lowering utility of the typical in-
dividual beyond what is captured by climate’s effect on
wealth. Unanticipated climate changes present investors
with an additional source of risk, which is non-traded and
only partially insurable. 9 This section extends our model
from Section 2 to include climate risk.
Let ˜ C denote climate at time 1, which is unknown at
time 0. We modify the utility function for individual i in
Eq. (2) to include ˜ C as follows:
V ( ˜ W 1 i , X i , ˜ C ) = −e −A i ˜ W 1 i −b ′
i X i −c i ˜ C . (55)
Let ¯c ≡
∫
i ω i c i di, the wealth-weighted mean of climate sen-
sitivity across agents. We assume ¯c > 0 , so that agents dis-
like low realizations of ˜ C , on average. We also assume ˜ C
is normally distributed, and without loss of generality we
set E { ˜ C } = 0 and Var { ˜ C } = 1 . Besides replacing Eq. (2) with
Eq. (55) , we maintain all other assumptions from Section 2 .
In principle, “climate” can be interpreted broadly, for
example, as “social climate.” However, for shocks to cli-
mate to affect asset prices, these shocks must enter the
average agent’s utility, in that ¯c > 0 . This assumption is
nontrivial because individuals’ views on various social is-
sues, such as guns and abortion, are quite heterogeneous
in practice. We emphasize the narrow interpretation of cli-
mate (“E” in ESG), for which the assumption is likely to
hold. Indeed, the correlations in ESG ratings across rating
agencies are higher for the “E” ratings than for the “S” and
“G” ratings (e.g., Berg et al., 2019 ).
5.1. Expected returns and portfolio holdings
Climate risk affects equilibrium stock returns, as shown
in the Appendix.
Proposition 7 . Expected excess returns in equilibrium are
given by
μ = μm βm −
¯d
a
g + ¯c
(
1 − ρ2
mC
)ψ, (56)
where ψ is the N ×1 vector of “climate betas” (slope coeﬃ-
cients on ˜ C in a multivariate regression of ˜ ϵon both ˜ ϵm and
˜ C ), and ρmC is the correlation between ˜ ϵm and ˜ C .
Expected returns depend on climate betas, ψ, which
represent ﬁrms’ exposures to non-market climate risk. To
understand the regression deﬁning ψ, recall that ˜ ϵis an
N ×1 vector of unexpected stock returns from Eq. (1) and
˜ ϵm is the unexpected market return. A ﬁrm’s climate beta
9 In that sense, climate risk is related to “background risk” analyzed
in prior work. Research into the risk associated with non-marketable
assets originates with Mayers (1972) . Examples of non-traded system-
atic risk factors include human capital ( Fama and Schwert, 1977 ), liquid-
ity ( Pástor and Stambaugh, 2003 ), and innovation-induced displacement
( Garleanu et al., 2012 ).
561

===== PAGE 13 =====

Ľ . Pástor, R.F. Stambaugh and L.A. Taylor Journal of Financial Economics 142 (2021) 550–571
is its loading on ˜ C after controlling for the market return.
Climate betas, ψ n , are likely to be related to ESG charac-
teristics, g n , as we argue in Section 5.2 .
Compared to Eq. (9) , expected excess returns contain an
additional component given by the last term on the right-
hand side of Eq. (56) . Stock n ’s climate beta, ψ n , enters ex-
pected return positively. Thus, a stock with a negative ψ n ,
which provides investors with a climate-risk hedge, has a
lower expected return than it would in the absence of cli-
mate risk. Vice versa, a stock with a positive ψ n , which
performs particularly poorly when the climate worsens un-
expectedly, has a higher expected return.
Proposition 8 . Agent i ’s equilibrium portfolio weights on the
Ns t o c k s are given by
X i = w m +
δi
a 2
(/Sigma1−1 g
)
− γi
a
(/Sigma1−1 σϵC
)
, (57)
where γi ≡ c i − ¯c and σϵC is an N ×1 vector of covariances
between ˜ ϵn and ˜ C .
Eq. (57) , which we prove in the Appendix, implies four-
fund separation. The ﬁrst three funds are the same as in
Proposition 3 ; the fourth one is a climate-hedging portfo-
lio whose weights are proportional to /Sigma1−1 σϵC . Agents with
γi > 0 , whose climate sensitivity is above average, short
the hedging portfolio, whereas agents with γi < 0 go long.
The climate-hedging portfolio, /Sigma1−1 σϵC , is a natural
mimicking portfolio for ˜ C . To see this, note that the N ele-
ments of /Sigma1−1 σϵC are the slope coeﬃcients from the mul-
tiple regression of ˜ C on ˜ ϵ. Therefore, the return on the
hedging portfolio has the highest correlation with ˜ C among
all portfolios of the N stocks. Investors in our model hold
this maximum-correlation portfolio, to various degrees de-
termined by their γi , to hedge climate risk. The climate-
hedging portfolio can tilt toward either green stocks or
brown stocks, depending on how returns on each type re-
late to climate shocks. The latter issue is addressed next.
5.2. Green stocks as climate hedges
Ultimately the issue of whether green stocks or brown
stocks are better climate hedges is an empirical question,
because sensible economic arguments can be made either
way. The argument that green stocks should hedge climate
risk can be motivated through both channels described in
Section 3 .
First, consider the customer channel. Unexpected wors-
ening of the climate can heighten consumers’ climate
concerns, prompting greater demands for goods and ser-
vices of greener providers. These demands can arise not
only from consumers’ preferences but also from govern-
ment regulation. Negative climate shocks can prompt gov-
ernment regulations that favor green providers or pe-
nalize brown ones. For example, the new regulations
could subsidize green products and tax, or even prohibit,
brown ones. Half of the institutional investors surveyed by
Krueger et al. (2020) state that climate risks related to reg-
ulation have already started to materialize.
Second, consider the investor channel. Unexpected
worsening of the climate can strengthen investors’ pref-
erence for green holdings (i.e., increase ¯d ), possibly
as a result of stronger public pressure on institutional
investors to divest from brown assets. For example,
Choi et al. (2020) show that retail investors sell carbon-
intensive ﬁrms in extremely warm months, consistent with
¯d rising in such months.
Climate shocks are thus likely to correlate negatively
with both components of the ESG factor in Eq. (41) . Green
stocks, which have positive exposures to this factor, are
likely to have negative exposures to ˜ C . These arguments
imply a negative correlation between g n and ψ n across
ﬁrms.
One can also argue that the better hedges of climate
risk are brown stocks, not green. Baker et al. (2020) as-
sume negative climate shocks result from positive shocks
to the output of brown ﬁrms. The latter shocks trans-
late to positive unexpected returns on those ﬁrms’ stocks,
thereby making brown stocks climate hedges. As noted
earlier, whether brown stocks or green stocks better hedge
climate risk ultimately rests on empirical evidence.
The evidence suggests that the better climate hedges
are green stocks. For example, Choi et al. (2020) show that
green ﬁrms, as measured by low carbon emissions, outper-
form brown ﬁrms during months with abnormally warm
weather, which the authors argue alerts investors to cli-
mate change. Engle et al. (2020) report that green ﬁrms, as
measured by high E-Scores from Sustainalytics, outperform
brown ﬁrms in periods with negative climate news. Both
studies thus show that a high-minus-low g n stock portfo-
lio is a good hedge against climate risk, indicating that g n
is negatively correlated with ψ n across ﬁrms.
In the special case where this negative correlation is
perfect, so that
ψ n = −ξg n , (58)
where ξ > 0 is a constant, Eq. (56) simpliﬁes to
μ = μm βm −
[ ¯d
a
+ ¯c
(
1 − ρ2
mC
)ξ
]
g. (59)
Stock n ’s CAPM alpha is then given by
αn = −
[ ¯d
a
+ ¯c
(
1 − ρ2
mC
)ξ
]
g n . (60)
Both terms inside the brackets are positive, so the negative
relation between αn and g n is stronger than in Corollary 2 .
Greener stocks now have lower CAPM alphas not only be-
cause of investors’ tastes for green holdings, but also be-
cause of greener stocks’ ability to better hedge climate
risk. Climate risk thus represents another reason to expect
green stocks to underperform brown ones over the long
run. For the same reason, green stocks have a lower cost
of capital than brown stocks relative to the CAPM.
In this special case, two-factor pricing from
Section 3 continues to hold. Each stock has a zero al-
pha in the two-factor model in Eq. (32) . The ESG factor
is still deﬁned as in Eq. (31) , but its premium is reduced
by ¯c
(
1 − ρ2
mC
)ξ, as compared to Eq. (33) . This reduction
reﬂects compensation for climate risk. The compensation
is negative because greener ﬁrms are better hedges against
this risk. The ESG factor’s premium thus has one taste-
based component, − ¯d /a, and one risk-based component,
−¯c
(
1 − ρ2
mC
)ξ.
562

===== PAGE 14 =====

Ľ . Pástor, R.F. Stambaugh and L.A. Taylor Journal of Financial Economics 142 (2021) 550–571
6. Social impact
Does sustainable investing produce real social impact?
This section explores how ﬁrms respond to the asset pric-
ing effects from Section 2 . We extend our baseline model
from that section to include ﬁrms’ choices of investment
and ESG characteristics.
We deﬁne the social impact of ﬁrm n as
S n ≡ g n K n , (61)
where K n is the ﬁrm’s operating capital. Social impact cap-
tures the ﬁrm’s total externalities, which depend on both
the nature of the ﬁrm’s operations ( g n ) and their scale ( K n ).
We consider two scenarios. In Section 6.1 , we let the ﬁrm’s
manager choose K n while taking g n as given. In Section 6.2 ,
we allow the manager to choose both K n and g n . Through-
out, the manager maximizes the ﬁrm’s market value at
time 0.
The extra assumptions we make here change none of
the previous sections’ predictions. Since investors are in-
ﬁnitesimally small, they still take asset prices and ﬁrms’
ESG characteristics as given, even though ﬁrms now choose
those characteristics. Firms’ choices of K n and g n affect
their market values, which are consistent with the ex-
pected returns derived in Section 2 .
6.1. Green ﬁrms invest more, brown ﬁrms less
The ﬁrm is initially endowed with operating capital
K 0 ,n > 0 . The ﬁrm’s manager chooses how much additional
capital, /Delta1K n , to buy, while taking the ﬁrm’s ESG character-
istic, g n , as given. The ﬁrm’s capital investment produces a
time-0 cash ﬂow of −/Delta1K n − κn
2 (/Delta1K n ) 2 , where κn > 0 con-
trols capital-adjustment costs. The ﬁrm uses capital to pro-
duce an expected gross cash ﬂow at time 1 equal to /Pi1n K n ,
where /Pi1n is a positive quantity denoting one plus the
ﬁrm’s gross proﬁtability.
The optimal amount of additional capital is derived in
the Appendix:
/Delta1K n ( d ) =
1
κn
[
/Pi1n
1 + r f + μm βm,n − d
a g n
−1
]
. (62)
This value is increasing in g n , indicating that greener ﬁrms
invest more, ceteris paribus.
For any ﬁrm n, agents’ ESG tastes induce social impact
equal to the difference between the ﬁrm’s actual social
impact and its hypothetical impact if agents did not care
about ESG:
S n ( d ) −S n (0) = g n
(/Delta1K n ( d ) − /Delta1K n ( 0 )
)
. (63)
We prove the following proposition in the Appendix.
Proposition 9 . Firm n ’s ESG-induced social impact is posi-
tive:
S n ( d ) −S n (0)
=
d g 2
n /Pi1n
aκn
(
1 + r f + μm βm,n −d
a g n
)(
1 + r f + μm βm,n
) > 0
(64)
as long as ¯d > 0 and g n ⁄ = 0 . Moreover, this impact is increas-
ing in d , decreasing in a, increasing in /Pi1n , decreasing in κn ,
and decreasing in βm,n .
The intuition behind this result builds on Eq. (62) ,
which shows that ESG tastes lead green ﬁrms to invest
more and brown ﬁrms to invest less. That result relates
to Corollary 1 , which states that ESG tastes reduce green
ﬁrms’ expected returns and hence their costs of capital.
Green ﬁrms’ lower costs of capital increase their projects’
NPVs, so green ﬁrms invest more. And vice versa, ESG
tastes increase brown ﬁrms’ costs of capital, reducing their
investment. As a result, ESG tastes tilt investment from
brown to green ﬁrms, which increases social impact for
both types of ﬁrms.
The comparative statics are also intuitive. Social im-
pact is larger when ESG tastes are stronger (i.e., when ¯d
is larger) because stronger tastes move asset prices more.
The impact is also larger when risk aversion is weaker (i.e.,
a is smaller) because less risk-averse agents tilt their port-
folios more to accommodate their tastes, again resulting in
larger price effects (see Propositions 1 and 3 ). The impact
is larger when capital is less costly to adjust (i.e., when
κn is smaller) because more investment reallocation takes
place. The impact is also larger when ﬁrms are more pro-
ductive (i.e., when /Pi1n is larger) because a given change in
the cost of capital has a larger effect on investment. Finally,
the impact is larger for ﬁrms with smaller market betas
because such ﬁrms have a lower cost of capital to begin
with, so the ESG-induced change in their cost of capital is
relatively larger.
In our model, investors’ ESG tastes tilt real investment
from brown to green ﬁrms because those tastes generate
alphas, which affect the cost of capital, which in turn af-
fects investment. There is considerable empirical support
for this mechanism. Baker and Wurgler (2012) survey stud-
ies that ﬁnd a negative relation between corporate in-
vestment and alpha. Most of these studies interpret alpha
as mispricing, whereas our study’s ESG-induced alphas do
not reﬂect mispricing. We expect ESG-induced alphas to
have an especially strong effect on investment. Whereas
mispricing is transient, ﬁrms’ ESG traits are highly per-
sistent, which makes ESG-induced alphas highly persis-
tent. Van Binsbergen and Opp (2019) show that when al-
phas are more persistent, they have stronger effects on
investment.
6.2. Firms become greener
We now extend the framework from Section 6.1 by al-
lowing ﬁrm n ’s manager to choose not only K n but also
g n . The ﬁrm is initially endowed with an ESG characteristic
g 0 ,n . The manager chooses both /Delta1K n and /Delta1g n , the change
in the ﬁrm’s ESG characteristic. For example, a coal power
producer can increase its g n by installing scrubbers. Adjust-
ing g n is costly: it reduces the ﬁrm’s time-1 cash ﬂow by a
fraction χn
2 (/Delta1g n ) 2 , where χn > 0 controls ESG-adjustment
costs.
We prove the following proposition in the Appendix.
563

===== PAGE 15 =====

Ľ . Pástor, R.F. Stambaugh and L.A. Taylor Journal of Financial Economics 142 (2021) 550–571
Proposition 10 . Firm n ’s value-maximizing choices of ESG
adjustment and investment are
/Delta1g n
(
d
)
≈ d
aχn
(65)
/Delta1K n
(
d
)
=
1
κn
[
/Pi1n
(
1 − χn
2 (/Delta1g n ( d )) 2 )
1 + r f + μm βm,n − d
a g n ( d )
−1
]
, (66)
where g n ( d ) = g 0 ,n + /Delta1g n ( d ) , and the approximation uses
log (1 + x ) ≈ x for small x.
Both choices are intuitive given the results from
Section 2 . When d > 0 , expected returns decrease in g n
( Corollary 1 ), so ﬁrms’ market values increase in g n . Man-
agers who wish to maximize market value therefore make
their ﬁrms greener (i.e, /Delta1g n > 0 ). This effect is especially
strong when risk aversion a is low because ESG character-
istics then have large effects on market values. Firms also
adjust g n by more when doing so is less costly.
As in Section 6.1 , ESG tastes lead green ﬁrms to in-
vest more and brown ﬁrms to invest less. The denomi-
nator in Eq. (66) shows that ESG tastes reduce the costs
of capital for green ﬁrms, which increases their projects’
NPV and hence investment. And vice versa, ESG tastes in-
crease brown ﬁrms’ costs of capital, reducing their projects’
NPV and investment. In addition, ESG tastes affect ex-
pected cash ﬂows in the numerator of Eq. (66) . Stronger
ESG tastes induce all ﬁrms, green and brown, to adjust
their g n by more, which reduces their expected cash ﬂows,
and hence also their investment.
Agents’ ESG tastes now increase social impact not only
by tilting investment from brown to green ﬁrms, as before,
but also by making ﬁrms greener:
S n ( d ) −S n ( 0 ) = g 0 ,n
(/Delta1K n ( d ) − /Delta1K n ( 0 )
)
+ K n ( d ) /Delta1g n ( d ) .
(67)
The ﬁrst term reﬂects the investment effect analogous
to Eq. (63) . As discussed previously, when ﬁrms cannot
change their g n ’s, /Delta1K n ( d ) − /Delta1K n (0) is positive for green
ﬁrms and negative for brown ﬁrms, making this term pos-
itive for both types of ﬁrms. When ﬁrms can change their
g n ’s, the ﬁrst term in Eq. (67) is still generally positive.
The second term reﬂects ﬁrms’ capital becoming greener.
This term is also positive since /Delta1g n ( d ) > 0 , as implied by
Eq. (65) .
Fig. 6 plots the ESG-induced social impact across ﬁrms
with different initial ESG characteristics. We see that all
ﬁrms have positive social impact. The two colored regions
indicate the two sources of social impact from Eq. (67) . The
second source, from ﬁrms becoming greener, is roughly
equal across ﬁrms (top green region). The ﬁrst source,
from tilting investment toward green ﬁrms, is zero for an
ESG-neutral ﬁrm, but it is large for very green or very
brown ﬁrms, which experience the largest shifts in invest-
ment (bottom blue region). Due to this non-monotonicity,
the overall social impact induced by ESG-motivated in-
vestors is largest for ﬁrms with extreme ESG charac-
Fig. 6. Firm-level social impact. This ﬁgure plots S n ( d ) −S n (0) , the so-
cial impact induced by ESG-motivated investors, for different ﬁrms n . The
horizontal axis indicates the ﬁrm’s initial ESG characteristic, g 0 ,n . The two
regions indicate the components of S n ( d ) −S n (0) from Eq. (67) . This ﬁg-
ure uses the same parameters as the previous ﬁgures, with λ = 0 . 5 and
/Delta1= 0 . 02 , as well as r f = 0 . 02 , K 0 ,n = 1 , /Pi1n = 1 . 2 , χn = 0 . 5 , and κn = 1 .
These parameter values produce d = 0 . 0113 , /Delta1g n ( d ) = 0 . 0113 , /Delta1K n (0) =
0 . 0909 , and /Delta1K n ( d ) ranging from 0.0813 to 0.1007.
teristics, but it is strictly positive even for ESG-neutral
ﬁrms.
The aggregate social impact induced by ESG investors,
denoted S( d ) −S(0) , is the sum of S n ( d ) −S n (0) across
ﬁrms n . This sum can be computed from the curve in
Fig. 6 . Since this curve is convex in g 0 ,n , S( d ) −S(0) is
greater when there is more dispersion in ESG character-
istics across ﬁrms. A larger dispersion in g 0 ,n deepens
the cost-of-capital differentials between green and brown
ﬁrms, leading to larger investment differentials. With green
ﬁrms investing more and brown ﬁrms investing less, aggre-
gate social impact increases.
Fig. 7 illustrates how aggregate social impact varies
with the strength of ESG preferences. We assume ﬁrms dif-
fer only in their initial ESG characteristics g 0 ,n , which are
uniformly distributed with mean zero. The ﬁgure shows
that S( d ) −S(0) increases as ESG preferences strengthen,
which is intuitive. We also see that both sources of so-
cial impact from Eq. (67) grow larger as ESG preferences
strengthen. These results hold whether ESG preferences
strengthen because there are more ESG investors (Panel A)
or because ESG investors have stronger tastes (Panel B).
We have made the standard assumption that managers
maximize the ﬁrm’s market value. This assumption makes
sense if, for example, managers wish to maximize the
value of their stock-based compensation. Alternatively, a
manager could maximize shareholder welfare, which de-
pends not just on market value but also on the ﬁrm’s ESG
characteristics (e.g., Hart and Zingales, 2017 ). Such behav-
ior could result from shareholders engaging actively with
the ﬁrm, so that managers run the ﬁrm as shareholders de-
sire (e.g., Dyck et al., 2019 ), or from shareholders appoint-
ing managers whose preferences match their own. Our
564

===== PAGE 16 =====

Ľ . Pástor, R.F. Stambaugh and L.A. Taylor Journal of Financial Economics 142 (2021) 550–571
Fig. 7. Aggregate social impact. The ﬁgure plots [ S( d ) −S(0)] /N, the ag-
gregate social impact induced by ESG-motivated investors, scaled by the
number of ﬁrms. We assume the ﬁrms’ initial ESG characteristics g 0 ,n are
uniformly distributed in [ −
√
3 ,
√
3 ] . (These endpoints maintain g ′
0 ι = 0
and (g ′
0 g 0 ) /N = 1 .) The two colored regions indicate the components of
S n ( d ) −S n (0) from Eq. (67) , aggregated across ﬁrms. In Panel A, results
are plotted against λ, the fraction of wealth belonging to ESG investors,
assuming /Delta1= 0 . 02 . In Panel B, results are plotted against /Delta1, the maxi-
mum certain return an ESG investor would sacriﬁce to invest in her op-
timal portfolio instead of the market portfolio, assuming λ = 0 . 5 . All re-
maining parameter values are the same as in Fig. 6 .
model arguably provides a lower bound on social impact.
Extending the model so that managers additionally care
about their ﬁrms’ ESG characteristics should produce /Delta1g n
values (and hence social impact) even larger than we cur-
rently predict. Put differently, we show that ESG-motivated
investors generate social impact even without direct en-
gagement by shareholders, and even if managers do not
care directly about ﬁrms’ ESG characteristics. Even a “self-
ish” manager who cares only about market value behaves
in a way that increases social impact.
6.3. Preferences for aggregate social impact
As noted in Section 2 , agents derive utility not only
from their holdings, X i , but also from ﬁrms’ aggregate so-
cial impact, S =
∑  N
n =1 S n . We assume each agent i ’s utility
is increasing in S:
U( ˜ W 1 i , X i , S) = V ( ˜ W 1 i , X i ) + h i (S) , (68)
where h ′
i (S) > 0 and V is the original utility function from
Eq. (2) . (The additive speciﬁcation is not needed; our re-
sults are identical if S enters utility multiplicatively.)
Proposition 11 . If agents derive utility also from aggregate
social impact ( Eq. (68) ), all of our results in Propositions 1
through 10 and Corollaries 1 through 4 continue to hold.
The inclusion of S in the utility function does not af-
fect any of our prior results. The reason is that inﬁnitesi-
mally small agents take stock prices, and hence S, as given
when choosing their portfolios. When an agent tilts toward
green stocks, she generates a positive externality on other
agents via the h i (S) term in their utility. 10 Being inﬁnitesi-
mal, though, she does not internalize any of this effect. As
the preference for S does not affect portfolio choice, it does
not affect equilibrium asset prices, real investment, or S. In
the model of Oehmke and Opp (2020) , agents’ preference
for social impact does lead to impact because agents are
assumed to coordinate. In our model, agents cannot coor-
dinate. Social impact is caused by the inclusion of X i , not
S, in the utility function in Eq. (68) .
To provide more intuition for the roles of X i and S in
the utility function, consider why people vote in elections.
Many individuals vote because they derive utility directly
from doing so, analogous to investors deriving utility from
their holdings ( X i ) in our setting. This utility from voting
can have various sources; for example, some people enjoy
participating in a democracy, others feel a warm glow from
voting for their favorite candidate, and some might like to
tell friends they have exercised their patriotic duty. Each
individual’s utility could also depend on the election out-
come ( S), but that by itself is not why an individual votes.
If there are a large number of voters, the individual sees
her vote as having no effect on that component of her util-
ity. Just as utility from voting produces an aggregate social
good (a healthy democracy), investors’ utility from their
portfolio holdings generates aggregate social impact.
More research is clearly needed on the real effects
of sustainable investing. For example, what is the rel-
ative importance of the investment channel ( /Delta1K n ) and
the “become-greener” channel ( /Delta1g n )? What if agents care
about both social impact and climate, and the effect of the
former on the latter is uncertain? How would social impact
change if we combined the asset pricing effects we ex-
amine with direct engagement by large shareholders? We
leave these questions for future work.
10 In the presence of externalities, the competitive market solution gen-
erally differs from the social planner’s solution. For an example of a social
planner’s solution in a different setting, with interesting implications for
ESG mandates, see Hong et al. (2020) .
565

===== PAGE 17 =====

Ľ . Pástor, R.F. Stambaugh and L.A. Taylor Journal of Financial Economics 142 (2021) 550–571
7. Conclusion
We analyze both ﬁnancial and real effects of sustain-
able investing in a highly tractable equilibrium model. The
model produces a number of empirical implications re-
garding asset prices, portfolio holdings, the size of the ESG
investment industry, climate risk, and the social impact of
sustainable investing. We review those implications below.
First, ESG preferences move asset prices. Stocks of
greener ﬁrms have lower ex ante CAPM alphas, especially
when risk aversion is low and the average ESG prefer-
ence is strong. Green stocks have negative alphas, whereas
brown stocks have positive alphas. Green stocks’ negative
alphas stem from two sources: investors’ tastes for green
holdings and such stocks’ ability to hedge climate risk.
Green and brown stocks have opposite exposures to an ESG
risk factor, which captures unexpected changes in ESG con-
cerns of customers and investors. If either kind of ESG con-
cern strengthens unexpectedly over a given period of time,
green stocks can outperform brown stocks over that pe-
riod, despite having lower alphas. Stocks are priced by a
two-factor asset pricing model, where the factors are the
market portfolio and the ESG factor. A simple version of
the ESG factor is a green-minus-brown portfolio return,
where both green and brown portfolios are weighted by
ESG characteristics.
Second, portfolio holdings exhibit three-fund separa-
tion. Investors with stronger than average ESG tastes hold
portfolios that have a green tilt away from the market
portfolio, whereas investors with weaker than average ESG
tastes take a brown tilt. These tilts are larger when risk
aversion is lower. Investors with stronger ESG tastes earn
lower expected returns, especially when risk aversion is
low and the average ESG taste is high. Yet these investors
give up less return than they are willing to in order to
hold their desired portfolio. In the model extension that
adds climate risk, we obtain four-fund separation, with the
fourth fund representing a climate-hedging portfolio with
a green tilt.
Third, the size of the ESG investment industry—the ag-
gregate dollar amount of ESG-driven investment that de-
viates from the market portfolio—is increasing in the dis-
persion of investors’ ESG preferences. With no dispersion
there is no ESG industry, because everyone holds the mar-
ket.
Finally, sustainable investing generates positive social
impact in two ways. First, it leads ﬁrms to become greener.
Second, it induces more real investment by green ﬁrms
and less investment by brown ﬁrms.
While the model’s predictions for alphas have been ex-
amined empirically by prior studies, most of its other pre-
dictions remain untested, presenting opportunities for fu-
ture empirical work. One challenge is that our model aims
to describe the world of the present and the future, but
not necessarily the world of the past. Although the “sin”
aspects of investing have been recognized for decades, the
emphasis on ESG criteria is a recent phenomenon. How the
model ﬁts in various time periods is another question for
empirical work.
Appendix. Proofs and derivations
Derivation of Eq. ( 4 ):
To compute agent i ’s expected utility, we rely on Eq. (2) ,
the relation ˜ W 1 i = W 0 i (1 + r f + X ′
i ˜ r ) , and the fact that ˜ r is
normally distributed, ˜ r ∼ N(μ, /Sigma1) :
E
{
V ( ˜ W 1 i , X i )
}
= E
{
−e −A i ˜ W 1 i −b ′
i X i
}
= E
{
−e −A i [ W 0 i (1+ r f + X ′
i ˜ r )] −b ′
i X i
}
= −e −a i (1+ r f ) E
{
e
−a i X ′
i [ ˜ r + 1
a i b i ]
}
= −e −a i (1+ r f ) e
−a i X ′
i [ E( ˜ r )+ 1
a i b i ]+ 1
2 a 2
i X ′
i Var ( ˜ r )X i
= −e −a i (1+ r f ) e
−a i X ′
i [ μ+ 1
a i b i ]+ 1
2 a 2
i X ′
i /Sigma1X i (A1)
where a i ≡ A i W 0 i is agent i ’s relative risk aversion. Agents
take μ and /Sigma1as given. Differentiating with respect to X i ,
we obtain the ﬁrst-order condition
−a i [ μ +
1
a i
b i ] +
1
2
a 2
i (2/Sigma1X i ) = 0 (A2)
from which we obtain agent i ’s portfolio weights
X i =
1
a i
/Sigma1−1
(
μ +
1
a i
b i
)
. (A3)
Derivation of Eq. ( 5 ):
The n th element of agent i ’s portfolio weight vector, X i ,
is given by
X i,n =
W 0 i,n
W 0 i
(A4)
where W 0 i,n is the dollar amount invested by agent i in
stock n . Let W 0 ,n ≡
∫
i W 0 i,n di denote the total amount in-
vested in stock n by all agents. Then the n th element of
the market-weight vector, w m , is given by
w m,n =
W 0 ,n
W 0
=
1
W 0
∫
i
W 0 i,n di =
1
W 0
∫
i
W 0 i X i,n di
=
∫
i
W 0 i
W 0
X i,n di =
∫
i
ω i X i,n di. (A5)
Note that
∑  N
n =1 w m,n = 1 because
∑  N
n =1 W 0 ,n = W 0 , which
follows from the riskless asset being in zero net supply.
Plugging in for X i from Eq. (A3) and imposing a i = a, we
have
x =
∫
i
ω i X i di
=
∫
i
ω i
[ 1
a
/Sigma1−1
(
μ +
1
a
b i
)]
di
=
1
a
/Sigma1−1 μ
(∫
i
ω i di
)
+
1
a 2 /Sigma1−1 g
(∫
i
ω i d i di
)
=
1
a
/Sigma1−1 μ +
¯d
a 2 /Sigma1−1 g. (A6)
Proof of the statement in footnote 4 :
Let ˜ g in denote agent i ’s perceived ESG characteristic of
ﬁrm n, known by all agents. Eq. (3) changes to b i = d i ˜ g i ,
where ˜ g i is an agent-speciﬁc N ×1 vector containing the
values of ˜ g in . Eq. (5) is unchanged, with g redeﬁned as
566

===== PAGE 18 =====

Ľ . Pástor, R.F. Stambaugh and L.A. Taylor Journal of Financial Economics 142 (2021) 550–571
g = (1 / d )
∫
i
ω i d i ˜ g i di
= E ω [ ˜ g i ] + Cov ω
(
d i / d , ˜ g i
)
, (A7)
where E ω and Cov ω denote the wealth-weighted expecta-
tion and covariance, respectively, across agents. The ﬁrst
term on the right-hand side of Eq. (A7) is an N ×1 vector
whose n th element is the wealth-weighted average of ˜ g in
across agents. The second term is a vector whose n th el-
ement is the wealth-weighted covariance between agents’
scaled ESG tastes, d i / d , and perceived ESG characteristics,
˜ g in . It seems plausible to assume that the second term is
a zero vector, but we do not need to make that assump-
tion. Since Eq. (5) is unchanged, Eqs. (6) through (9) are
also unchanged.
Derivation of Eq. ( 11 ):
Agent i ’s expected excess return is given by E ( ˜ r i ) = X ′
i μ.
We take μ from Eq. (9) and express X i in terms of w m by
subtracting Eq. (5) from Eq. (4) . Recalling the assumption
w ′
m g = 0 from Eq. (8) , we obtain agent i ’s expected excess
return as
E ( ˜ r i ) = X ′
i μ
=
[
w ′
m +
δi
a 2 g ′ /Sigma1−1
][
μm βm −
¯d
a
g
]
=
[
w ′
m +
δi
a 2 g ′ /Sigma1−1
][μm
σ2
m
/Sigma1w m −
¯d
a
g
]
= μm − d
a
w ′
m g +
δi μm
a 2 σ2
m
g ′ w m − δi d
a 3 g ′ /Sigma1−1 g
= μm − δi ¯d
a 3 g ′ /Sigma1−1 g. (A8)
Derivation of Eq. ( 12 ):
Recall that agent i ’s excess portfolio return is ˜ r i = X ′
i ˜ r ,
where ˜ r ∼ N(μ, /Sigma1) . Therefore,
Var ( ˜ r i ) = X ′
i /Sigma1X i
=
[
w ′
m +
δi
a 2 g ′ /Sigma1−1
]
/Sigma1
[
w m +
δi
a 2 /Sigma1−1 g
]
= w ′
m /Sigma1w m +
δi
a 2 g ′ /Sigma1−1 /Sigma1w m + w ′
m /Sigma1δi
a 2 /Sigma1−1 g
+
δ2
i
a 4 g ′ /Sigma1−1 /Sigma1/Sigma1−1 g
= w ′
m /Sigma1w m +
δi
a 2 g ′ w m +
δi
a 2 w ′
m g +
δ2
i
a 4 g ′ /Sigma1−1 g. (A9)
Recognizing that w ′
m /Sigma1w m = σ2
m and w ′
m g = 0 , we have
Var ( ˜ r i ) = σ2
m +
δ2
i
a 4 g ′ /Sigma1−1 g (A10)
which is Eq. (12) . We see that Var ( ˜ r i ) > σ2
m as long as δi ⁄ =
0 .
Derivation of Eq. ( 13 ):
The second exponent in agent i ’s expected util-
ity in Eq. (A1) contains the terms −aX ′
i μ, −X ′
i b i , and
(a 2 / 2) X ′
i /Sigma1X i . The ﬁrst of these is simply minus a times the
expression in Eq. (A8) . The second is given by
−X ′
i b i = −
[
w ′
m +
δi
a 2 g ′ /Sigma1−1
]
[ d i g ]
= −d i δi
a 2 g ′ /Sigma1−1 g, (A11)
and the third is given by
a 2
2
X ′
i /Sigma1X i =
a 2
2
[
w ′
m +
δi
a 2 g ′ /Sigma1−1
]
/Sigma1
[
w m +
δi
a 2 /Sigma1−1 g
]
=
a 2
2
σ2
m +
δ2
i
2 a 2 g ′ /Sigma1−1 g, (A12)
recalling w ′
m g = 0 in both cases. Adding the three terms
then gives
−aX ′
i μ −X ′
i b i + (a 2 / 2) X ′
i /Sigma1X i
= −aμm +
δi ¯d
a 2 g ′ /Sigma1−1 g − d i δi
a 2 g ′ /Sigma1−1 g +
a 2
2
σ2
m +
δ2
i
2 a 2 g ′ /Sigma1−1 g
= −aμm +
a 2
2
σ2
m +
1
a 2
(
δi d −d i δi +
1
2
δ2
i
)
g ′ /Sigma1−1 g
= −a
(
μm − a
2
σ2
m
)
− δ2
i
2 a 2 g ′ /Sigma1−1 g. (A13)
Substituting this exponent into Eq. (A1) gives
E
{
V ( ˜ W 1 i , X i )
}
= −e −a (1+ r f ) e −a ( μm −a
2 σ2
m ) −
δ2
i
2 a 2 g ′ /Sigma1−1 g
=
[
−e −a (1+ r f ) e −a ( μm −a
2 σ2
m )
]
e −
δ2
i
2 a 2 g ′ /Sigma1−1 g
= ¯V e −
δ2
i
2 a 2 g ′ /Sigma1−1 g , (A14)
noting that the bracketed term is ¯V , the agent’s expected
utility if δi = 0 .
Derivation of Eq. ( 42 ):
The assumptions below Eq. (36) , along with Eq. (40) ,
imply that the covariance matrix of ˜ r is of the form
/Sigma1= B /Omega1B ′ + σ2
ζ I, (A15)
in which B = [ βm g] , and both B ′ B and /Omega1are diagonal ma-
trices:
B ′ B =
[
β′
m βm 0
0 g ′ g
]
, /Omega1=
[
σ2
1 0
0 σ2
2
]
. (A16)
Inverting /Sigma1using the Woodbury identity gives
/Sigma1−1 =
1
σ2
ζ
I − 1
σ4
ζ
B /Theta1B ′ , (A17)
in which /Theta1is the diagonal matrix,
/Theta1=
[
θm 0
0 θg
]
=
[
/Omega1−1 +
1
σ2
ζ
B ′ B
]−1
, (A18)
and
θg =
σ2
2 σ2
ζ
σ2
ζ + g ′ gσ2
2
. (A19)
Post-multiplying the right-hand side of Eq. (A17) by g and
recognizing that g ′ βm = 0 gives
/Sigma1−1 g =
(
1
σ2
ζ
− θg g ′ g
σ4
ζ
)
g =
(
1
σ2
ζ + g ′ gσ2
2
)
g. (A20)
567

===== PAGE 19 =====

Ľ . Pástor, R.F. Stambaugh and L.A. Taylor Journal of Financial Economics 142 (2021) 550–571
If ι′ g ⁄ = 0 , then from Eqs. (17) through (21) and the sur-
rounding discussion, w g = g/ (ι′ g) , and g g = (g ′ g) / (ι′ g) . If
ι′ g = 0 , then w g equals the right-hand side of Eq. (A20) ,
and g g = (g ′ g) / (σ2
ζ + g ′ gσ2
2 ) . In either case, (1 /g g ) w g =
g/ (g ′ g) . The deﬁnition of ˜ f g in Eq. (31) implies that pre-
multiplying the right-hand side of Eq. (40) by (1 /g g ) w ′
g ,
recalling that w ′
g βm = 0 , gives
˜ f g −E 0 { f g } = ˜ f e
g + ˜ ξ, (A21)
with ˜ ξ = (g ′ ˜ ζ) / (g ′ g) . The variance of ˜ ξ is σ2
ζ / (g ′ g) , which
goes to zero as N → ∞ if the cross-sectional second mo-
ment of the elements of g, (g ′ g) /N, is bounded below by a
positive value for all N.
Derivation of Eq. ( 45 ):
First note that /Sigma1is of the same form as in Eq. (A15) ,
with the relabelings η2 = σ2
ζ , σm = σ1 , and σf = σ2 . Also,
as there, β′
m g = 0 . Therefore, using Eq. (A20) ,
/Sigma1−1 g =
(
1
η2 + g ′ gσ2
f
)
g =
(
1
η2 + Nσ2
f
)
g. (A22)
Using Eq. (A22) and noting g ′ g = N, observe that for large
N,
g ′ /Sigma1−1 g =
(
1
η2 + Nσ2
f
)
g ′ g =
1
σ2
f
. (A23)
Also observe that, because ι′ /Sigma1−1 g = 0 (recall ι′ g = 0 ), the
ESG portfolio has zero cost and weights w g = /Sigma1−1 g as in
Eq. (18) . By Eq. (A22) , the ESG portfolio goes long green
stocks and short brown stocks. The greenness of the ESG
portfolio is given by
g g = w ′
g g = g ′ /Sigma1−1 g =
1
σ2
f
. (A24)
The portfolio weights for each type of investor follow di-
rectly from Eq. (14) , with δi = (1 − λ) d for an ESG investor
and δi = −λd for a non-ESG investor:
X esg = w m + (1 − λ)
d
a 2 /Sigma1−1 g (A25)
X non = w m − λ d
a 2 /Sigma1−1 g. (A26)
Therefore, using Eq. (A22) , the ESG investor’s portfolio
weights in Eq. (A25) become
X esg =
1
N
ι + (1 − λ)
d
a 2 /Sigma1−1 g =
1
N
(ι + hg) , (A27)
with
h =
(1 − λ) d
a 2 (η2 /N + σ2
f )
, (A28)
which, as N grows large, converges to
h =
(1 − λ) d
a 2 σ2
f
. (A29)
With expected utility as given by Eq. (A1) , an ESG in-
vestor’s certainty equivalent excess return from holding
her optimal portfolio is
r ∗
esg = X ′
esg
(
μ +
d
a
g
)
− a
2
X ′
esg /Sigma1X esg
=
1
N
(ι + hg) ′
(
μm βm − λd
a
g +
d
a
g
)
− a
2
X ′
esg /Sigma1X esg
= μm +
h (1 − λ) d
a
− a
2
X ′
esg /Sigma1X esg . (A30)
Recall that δi for the ESG investor is (1 − λ) d, and thus
the variance of the ESG investor’s portfolio return, using
Eq. (12) , is
X ′
esg /Sigma1X esg = σ2
m +
(1 − λ) 2 d 2
a 4 σ2
f
. (A31)
Combining Eqs. (A29) , (A30) , and (A31) , we then see
r ∗
esg = μm − a
2
σ2
m +
(1 − λ) 2 d 2
2 a 3 σ2
f
. (A32)
If the ESG investor is instead constrained to hold the mar-
ket portfolio, the resulting certainty equivalent excess re-
turn is given by
r ∗
m = w ′
m μ − a
2
w ′
m /Sigma1w m = μm − a
2
σ2
m . (A33)
The ESG investor’s certainty-equivalent gain from investing
as desired, versus investing in the market, is therefore
r ∗
esg −r ∗
m =
(1 − λ) 2 d 2
2 a 3 σ2
f
. (A34)
This difference in certainty equivalents is largest when λ =
0 . That largest difference, /Delta1, is therefore
/Delta1=
d 2
2 a 3 σ2
f
, (A35)
and substituting for σ2
f using Eq. (A24) gives Eq. (45) . The
corresponding value of d is
d =
√
2/Delta1a 3 σ2
f . (A36)
Derivation of the certainty equivalent excess return of a non-
ESG investor ( Section 4.2 ):
Proceeding as above, the non-ESG investor’s portfolio
weights in Eq. (A26) become
X non =
1
N
ι − λ d
a 2 /Sigma1−1 g =
1
N
(ι + kg) , (A37)
with
k = − λd
a 2 (η2 /N + σ2
f )
. (A38)
Similarly, the variance of the non-ESG investor’s portfolio
return for large N is
X ′
non /Sigma1X non = σ2
m + k 2 σ2
f , (A39)
and a non-ESG investor’s certainty equivalent excess return
from holding her optimal portfolio is
r ∗
non = X ′
non μ − a
2
X ′
non /Sigma1X non
=
1
N
(ι + kg) ′ (μm βm − λd
a
g) − a
2
X ′
non /Sigma1X non
568

===== PAGE 20 =====

Ľ . Pástor, R.F. Stambaugh and L.A. Taylor Journal of Financial Economics 142 (2021) 550–571
= μm − a
2
σ2
m +
λ2 d 2
2 a 3 σ2
f
= r ∗
m +
λ2 d 2
2 a 3 σ2
f
. (A40)
Derivation of Eq. ( 46 ):
From Eqs. (11) and (A23) , the difference in expected ex-
cess returns earned by the two types of investors is
E ( ˜ r esg ) −E ( ˜ r non ) = −λd 2
a 3 g ′ /Sigma1−1 g = − λd 2
a 3 σ2
f
. (A41)
Substituting for d 2 from Eq. (A36) gives Eq. (46) .
Derivation of Eq. ( 47 ):
The covariance between the ESG investor’s return and
the market return, using Eq. (A27) is
X ′
esg /Sigma1w m =
1
N 2 (ι + hg) ′ (σ2
m βm β′
m + σ2
f gg ′ + η2 I N
)ι
= σ2
m +
1
N
η2 , (A42)
which equals σ2
m for large N. Combining this result with
Eq. (A31) gives the correlation between the ESG investor’s
return and the market return as
ρ( ˜ r esg , ˜ r m ) =
X ′
esg /Sigma1w m
σm
√
X ′
esg /Sigma1X esg
=
σm √
σ2
m + (1 −λ) 2 d 2
a 4 σ2
f
. (A43)
Substituting for d 2 from Eq. (A36) gives Eq. (47) .
Derivations of Eqs. ( 48 ) and ( 49 ):
Let α denote the N ×1 vector of alphas given by Eq.
(10) . The alpha of the ESG investor is given by
αesg = X ′
esg α
=
1
N
( ι + hg ) ′
(
−λd
a
g
)
= −λ(1 − λ)
d 2
a 3 σ2
f
, (A44)
using Eqs. (A27) and (A29) . Substituting for d 2 from Eq.
(A36) gives Eq. (48) . The wealth-weighted average alpha
must equal zero,
λαesg + (1 − λ) αnon = 0 , (A45)
and applying that identity gives Eq. (49) .
Derivation of Eq. ( 53 ):
Because ι′ X esg = 1 , ESG investors’ stock portfolio
weights, w i , are simply X esg from Eq. (A27) . Using Eqs.
(A27) and (A29) , along with w m = (1 /N) ι, gives
T =
1
2
λι′ | X esg −w m |
=
1
2
λι′
⏐⏐⏐
1
N
(ι + hg) − 1
N
ι
⏐⏐⏐
=
1
2
λι′
⏐⏐
⏐
⏐
(1 − λ) d
Na 2 σ2
f
g
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
. (A46)
Substituting for d from Eq. (A36) , we obtain Eq. (53) .
Derivation of Eq. ( 56 ):
Modifying the earlier derivation of Eq. (4) , we obtain
E
{
V ( ˜ W 1 i , X i , ˜ C )
}
= −e −a i (1+ r f ) E
{
e
−a i X ′
i [ ˜ r + 1
a i b i ] −c i ˜ C
}
= −e −a i (1+ r f ) e
−a i X ′
i [E( ˜ r )+ 1
a i b i ]+ 1
2 a 2
i X ′
i Var ( ˜ ϵ) X i + a i c i X ′
i Cov ( ˜ ϵ, ˜ C )+ 1
2 c 2
i Var ( ˜ C )
= −e −a i (1+ r f ) e
−a i X ′
i [ μ+ 1
a i b i ]+ 1
2 a 2
i X ′
i /Sigma1X i + a i c i X ′
i σϵC + 1
2 c 2
i σ2
C (A47)
where σϵC ≡ Cov( ˜ ϵ, ˜ C ) . Differentiating with respect to X i
gives the ﬁrst-order condition
−a i [ μ +
1
a i
b i ] + a 2
i /Sigma1X i + a i c i σϵC = 0 (A48)
from which we obtain agent i ’s portfolio weights
X i =
1
a i
/Sigma1−1
(
μ +
1
a i
b i −c i σϵC
)
. (A49)
Again imposing the market-clearing condition and a i = a
gives
w m =
∫
i
ω i X i di
=
1
a
/Sigma1−1 μ +
¯d
a 2 /Sigma1−1 g − ¯c
a
/Sigma1−1 σϵC (A50)
which implies
μ = a /Sigma1w m −
¯d
a
g + ¯c σϵC . (A51)
Premultiplying by w ′
m , again imposing the assumption
w ′
m g = 0 , gives
μm = aσ2
m + ¯c σmC (A52)
where σmC ≡ Cov( ˜ ϵm , ˜ C ) = w ′
m σϵC . Solving Eq. (A52) for a
and substituting into the ﬁrst term on the right-hand side
of Eq. (A51) gives
μ =
μm − ¯c σmC
σ2
m
/Sigma1w m −
¯d
a
g + ¯c σϵC
= (μm − ¯c σmC ) βm −
¯d
a
g + ¯c σϵC
= μm βm −
¯d
a
g + ¯c
(
σϵC − σmC
σ2
m
σϵm
)
, (A53)
noting βm = (1 /σ2
m ) σϵm = (1 /σ2
m )/Sigma1w m . To see that the
third term on the right-hand side of Eq. (A53) is the same
as that in Eq. (56) , ﬁrst observe that in the multivariate
regression of ˜ ϵon ˜ ϵm and ˜ C , the N ×2 matrix of slope co-
eﬃcients is given by
[ σϵm σϵC ]
[
σ2
m σmC
σmC σ2
C
]−1
=
1
σ2
m σ2
C − σ2
mC
[σ2
C σϵm − σmC σϵC σ2
m σϵC − σmC σϵm
]
,
so the second column is given by
ψ =
1
σ2
m σ2
C − σ2
mC
(σ2
m σϵC − σmC σϵm ) . (A54)
Using Eq. (A54) , we can rewrite the third term on the
right-hand side of Eq. (A53) as
569

===== PAGE 21 =====

Ľ . Pástor, R.F. Stambaugh and L.A. Taylor Journal of Financial Economics 142 (2021) 550–571
¯c
(
σϵC − σmC
σ2
m
σϵm
)
= ¯c
σ2
m σ2
C − σ2
mC
σ2
m
ψ
= ¯c
(
1 − ρ2
mC
)ψ (A55)
recalling that σC = 1 .
Derivation of Eq. ( 57 ):
Substituting for μ from Eq. (A53) into Eq. (A49) and
setting a i = a, we obtain
X i =
1
a
/Sigma1−1
(
μ +
1
a
b i −c i σϵC
)
=
1
a
/Sigma1−1
[
μm βm −
¯d
a
g + ¯c
(
σϵC − σmC
σ2
m
σϵm
)
+
1
a
b i −c i σϵC
]
=
μm
a
/Sigma1−1 βm − 1
a
/Sigma1−1 ¯c
σmC
σ2
m
σϵm
+
1
a
/Sigma1−1
(
d i
a
g −
¯d
a
g
)
− 1
a
/Sigma1−1 ( c i − ¯c ) σϵC
=
μm
a
/Sigma1−1 βm − 1
a
/Sigma1−1 ( ¯c σmC )
σϵm
σ2
m
+
1
a
/Sigma1−1 δi
a
g − c i − ¯c
a
/Sigma1−1 σϵC . (A56)
Noting from Eq. (A52) that ¯c σmC = μm −aσ2
m , and that
βm = 1
σ2 m
σϵm = 1
σ2 m
/Sigma1w m , we have
X i =
μm
a
/Sigma1−1 βm − 1
a
/Sigma1−1 (μm −aσ2
m
)βm
+
δi
a 2 /Sigma1−1 g − c i − ¯c
a
/Sigma1−1 σϵC
= σ2
m /Sigma1−1 βm +
δi
a 2 /Sigma1−1 g − c i − ¯c
a
/Sigma1−1 σϵC
= w m +
δi
a 2 /Sigma1−1 g − c i − ¯c
a
/Sigma1−1 σϵC (A57)
which is Eq. (57) .
Derivation of Eq. ( 64 ):
The ﬁrm’s value at time 0 is
υn = −/Delta1K n − κn
2
(/Delta1K n ) 2 +
/Pi1n ( K 0 ,n + /Delta1K n )
1 + r f + μm βn − d
a g n
. (A58)
The manager maximizes υn by choosing /Delta1K n . The ﬁrst-
order condition yields
/Delta1K n ( d ) =
1
κn
[
/Pi1n
1 + r f + μm βn − d
a g n
−1
]
. (A59)
Substituting into Eq. (63) produces
S n ( d ) −S n (0) = g n
1
κn
[
/Pi1n
1 + r f + μm βn − d
a g n
− /Pi1n
1 + r f + μm βn
]
= g n
/Pi1n
κn
[
d
a g n
(1 + r f + μm βn − d
a g n )(1 + r f + μm βn )
]
,
(A60)
which produces Eq. (64) . Comparative statics for /Pi1n , βn ,
and κn follow immediately from Eq. (64) . For the compar-
ative statics for d and a, we deﬁne ˜ d ≡ d /a and compute
∂
∂ ˜ d
(
S n ( d ) −S n (0)
)
=
g 2
n /Pi1n
κn (1 + r f + μm βn )
[(1 + r f + μm βn − ˜ d g n ) + ˜ d g n
(1 + r f + μm βn − ˜ d g n ) 2
]
=
g 2
n /Pi1n
κn
[
1
(1 + r f + μm βn − ˜ d g n ) 2
]
(A61)
which is positive if g n ⁄ = 0 . Since S n ( d ) −S n (0) increases in
˜ d , it increases in d and decreases in a .
Derivation of Eqs. ( 65 ) and ( 66 ) :
The ﬁrm’s value at time 0 is now
υn = −/Delta1K n − κn
2
(/Delta1K n ) 2
+
/Pi1n ( K 0 ,n + /Delta1K n )
(
1 − χn
2 (/Delta1g n ) 2 )
1 + r f + μm βn − d
a (g 0 ,n + /Delta1g n )
. (A62)
The manager maximizes υn by choosing /Delta1g n and /Delta1K n . The
choice of /Delta1g n depends only on the third term of Eq. (A62) ,
and we can maximize its log. Using the approximation that
log (1 + x ) ≈ x and ignoring terms without /Delta1g n , the choice
of /Delta1g n simpliﬁes to
max
/Delta1g n
−χn
2
(/Delta1g n ) 2 +
d
a
/Delta1g n . (A63)
The ﬁrst-order condition delivers Eq. (65) . Without taking
logs, the ﬁrst-order condition for /Delta1K n is
−1 − κn /Delta1K n +
/Pi1n
(
1 − χn
2 (/Delta1g n ) 2 )
1 + r f + μm βn − d
a g n
= 0 (A64)
which delivers Eq. (66) .
References
Albuquerque, R. , Koskinen, Y. , Zhang, C. , 2019. Corporate social responsi-
bility and ﬁrm risk: theory and empirical evidence. Manag. Sci. 65,
4 451–4 469 .
Baker, M. , Bergstresser, D. , Serafeim, G. , Wurgler, J. ,2 0 1 8 . Financing the
response to climate change: the pricing and ownership of U.S. green
bonds. Harvard University .
Baker, M. , Wurgler, J. , 2012. Behavioral corporate ﬁnance: an updated sur-
vey. In: Constantinides, G., Harris, M., Stulz, R. (Eds.), Handbook of the
Economics of Finance, Vol. 2. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 357–424 .
Baker, S. , Holliﬁeld, B. , Osambela, E. , 2020. Asset prices and portfolios with
externalities. University of Virginia .
Bank, M. , Insam, F. , 2017. Return contributions of factors and characteris-
tics in an integrated asset pricing approach. University of Innsbruck .
Bansal, R. , Ochoa, M. , Kiku, D. , 2016. Climate change and growth risks.
Duke University .
Barber, B. , Morse, A. , Yasuda, A. , 2021. Impact investing. J. Financ. Econ.
forthcoming .
Bauer, R. , Koedijk, K. , Otten, R. , 2005. International evidence on ethical
mutual fund performance and investment style. J. Bank. Financ. 29,
1751–1767 .
Berg, F. , Koelbel, J. , Rigobon, R. , 2019. Aggregate confusion: the divergence
of ESG ratings. Massachusetts Institute of Technology .
Bialkowski, J. , Starks, L. , 2016. SRI funds: investor demand, exogenous
shocks and ESG proﬁles. University of Canterbury .
van Binsbergen, J. , Opp, C. , 2019. Real anomalies. J. Financ. 74, 1659–1706 .
Bollen, N. , 2007. Mutual fund attributes and investor behavior. J. Financ.
Quant. Anal. 42, 683–708 .
570

===== PAGE 22 =====

Ľ . Pástor, R.F. Stambaugh and L.A. Taylor Journal of Financial Economics 142 (2021) 550–571
Bolton, P. , Kacperczyk, M. , 2019. Do investors care about carbon risk?.
Columbia University .
Chava, S. , 2014. Environmental externalities and cost of capital. Manag.
Sci. 60, 2223–2247 .
Cheng, I. , Hong, H. , Shue, K. , 2016. Do Managers Do Good With Other Peo-
ples’ Money?. Dartmouth College .
Choi, D. , Gao, Z. , Jiang, W. , 2020. Attention to global warming. Rev. Financ.
Stud. 33, 1112–1145 .
Dimson, E. , Karakas, O. , Li, X. , 2015. Active ownership. Rev. Financ. Stud.
28, 3225–3268 .
Dyck, A. , Lins, K. , Roth, L. , Wagner, H. , 2019. Do institutional investors
drive corporate social responsibility? International evidence. J. Financ.
Econ. 131, 693–714 .
Edmans, A. , 2011. Does the stock market fully value intangibles? Employee
satisfaction and equity prices. J. Financ. Econ. 101, 621–640 .
El Ghoul, S. , Guedhami, O. , Kwok, C. , Mishra, D. , 2011. Does corporate
social responsibility affect the cost of capital? J. Bank. Financ. 35,
2388–2406 .
Engle, R. , Giglio, S. , Kelly, B. , Lee, H. , Stroebel, J. , 2020. Hedging climate
change news. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33, 1184–1216 .
Fama, E. , French, K. , 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks
and bonds. J. Financ. Econ. 33, 3–56 .
Fama, E. , French, K. , 2007. Disagreement, tastes, and asset prices. J. Financ.
Econ. 83, 667–689 .
Fama, E. , Schwert, G. , 1977. Human capital and capital market equilibrium.
J. Financ. Econ. 4, 95–125 .
Friedman, H. , Heinle, M. , 2016. Taste, information, and asset prices: impli-
cations for the valuation of CSR. Rev. Account. Stud. 21, 740–767 .
Garleanu, N. , Kogan, L. , Panageas, S. , 2012. Displacement risk and asset
returns. J. Financ. Econ. 105, 491–510 .
Geczy, C. , Stambaugh, R. , Levin, D. , 2005. Investing in socially responsible
mutual funds. University of Pennsylvania .
Gollier, C. , Pouget, S. , 2014. The “Washing Machine”: investment strategies
and corporate behavior with socially responsible investors. Toulouse
School of Economics .
Gompers, P. , Ishii, J. , Metrick, A. , 2003. Corporate governance and equity
prices. Q. J. Econ. 118, 107–156 .
Hart, O. , Zingales, L. ,2 0 1 7 . Companies should maximize shareholder wel-
fare not market value. J. Law Finance Account. 2, 247–274 .
Hartzmark, S. , Sussman, A. , 2019. Do investors value sustainability? A
natural experiment examining ranking and fund ﬂows. J. Financ. 74,
2789–2837 .
Heinkel, R. , Kraus, A. , Zechner, J. , 2001. The effect of green investment on
corporate behavior. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 36, 431–449 .
Hoepner, A. , Oikonomou, I. , Sautner, Z. , Starks, L. , Zhou, X. , 2018.
ESG shareholder engagement and downside risk. University College
Dublin .
Hong, H. , Kacperczyk, M. , 2009. The price of sin: the effects of social
norms on markets. J. Financ. Econ. 93, 15–36 .
Hong, H. , Kostovetsky, L. , 2012. Red and blue investing: values and ﬁ-
nance. J. Financ. Econ. 103, 1–19 .
Hong, H. , Li., F. , Xu, J. , 2019. Climate risks and market eﬃciency. J. Econom.
208, 265–281 .
Hong, H. , Wang, N. , Yang, J. , 2020. Implications of mitigating disaster risks
for sustainable investing and growth. Columbia University .
Humphrey, J. , Kogan, S. , Sagi, J. , Starks, L. , 2020. The asymmetry in respon-
sible investing preferences. University of Queensland .
Ilhan, E. , Sautner, Z. , Vilkov, G. , 2020. Carbon tail risk. Frankfurt School of
Finance and Management .
Kempf, A. , Osthoff, P. , 2007. The effect of socially responsible investing on
portfolio performance. Eur. Financ. Manag. 13, 908–922 .
Krueger, P. , Sautner, Z. , Starks, L. , 2020. The importance of climate risks
for institutional investors. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33, 1067–1111 .
Luo, A. , Balvers, R. , 2017. Social screens and systematic investor boycott
risk. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 52, 365–399 .
Mayers, D. , 1972. Nonmarketable assets and capital market equilibrium
under uncertainty. In: Jensen, M. (Ed.), Studies in the Theory of Capi-
tal Markets. Praeger, New York, pp. 223–248 .
Oehmke, M. , Opp, M. , 2020. A theory of socially responsible investment.
London School of Economics .
Pástor, L. , Stambaugh, R. , 2003. Liquidity risk and expected stock returns.
J. Polit. Econ. 111, 642–685 .
Pedersen, L. , Fitzgibbons, S. , Pomorski, L. , 2021. Responsible investing: the
ESG-eﬃcient frontier. J. Financ. Econ. forthcoming .
Renneboog, L. , ter Horst, J. , Zhang, C. , 2008. Socially responsible invest-
ments: institutional aspects, performance, and investor behavior. J.
Bank. Financ. 32, 1723–1742 .
Renneboog, L. , ter Horst, J. , Zhang, C. , 2011. Is ethical money ﬁnancially
smart? Nonﬁnancial attributes and money ﬂows of socially responsi-
ble investment funds. J. Financ. Intermed. 20, 562–588 .
Riedl, A. , Smeets, P. , 2017. Why do investors hold socially responsible mu-
tual funds? J. Financ. 72, 2505–2550 .
Zerbib, O. , 2019. The effect of pro-environmental preferences on bond
prices: evidence from green bonds. J. Bank. Financ. 98, 39–60 .
571