

===== PAGE 1 =====

Journal of Financial Economics 141 (2021) 968–980 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Journal of Financial Economics 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec 
Who provides liquidity, and when? ✩ 
Sida Li a , Xin Wang b , Mao Ye a , c , ∗
a University of Illinois at Urbana—Champaign, Gies College of Business, 340 Wohlers Hall, 1206 S. 6th Street, Champaign, IL 61820, USA 
b Nanyang Business School, Nanyang Technological University, Division of Banking and Finance, Singapore 639798, Singapore 
c National Bureau of Economic Research, 1050 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA 
a r t i c l e i n f o 
Article history: 
Received 2 January 2019 
Revised 29 May 2020 
Accepted 5 June 2020 
Available online 29 April 2021 
JEL classiﬁcation: 
G14 
G18 
Keywords: 
High-frequency trading 
Algorithmic trading 
Tick size 
Liquidity 
Bid-ask spread 
a b s t r a c t 
We model competition for liquidity provision between high-frequency traders (HFTs) and 
slower execution algorithms (EAs) designed to minimize investors’ transaction costs. Under 
continuous pricing, EAs dominate liquidity provision by using aggressive limit orders to 
stimulate HFTs’ market orders. Under discrete pricing, HFTs dominate liquidity provision 
if the bid-ask spread is binding at one tick. If the tick size (minimum price variation) is 
not binding, EAs choose between stimulating HFTs and providing liquidity to non-HFTs. 
Transaction costs increase with the tick size but can be negatively correlated with the bid- 
ask spread when all traders can provide liquidity. 
Published by Elsevier B.V. 
✩ For helpful comments and suggestions, we thank Ron Kaniel (the 
co-editor), Albert (Pete) Kyle (the referee), Hengjie Ai, Shmuel Baruch, 
Malcolm Baker, Dan Bernhardt, Hank Bessembinder, Eric Budish, Tarun 
Chordia, Thierry Foucault, Larry Glosten, Larry Harris, Katya Malinova, 
Jingyuan Mo, Joseph Noss, Maureen O’Hara, Monika Piazzesi, Veronika 
Pool, Neil Pearson, Barbara Rindi, Shrihari Santosh, Andriy Shkilko, Brian 
Weller, Chen Yao, Bart Yueshen, Marius Zoican, and seminar participants 
at the University of Rochester, University of California at Los Angeles, 
Texas A&M University, the University of Florida, and Washington Uni- 
versity at St. Louis, as well as conference participants at the Society for 
Financial Studies (SFS) Cavalcade, the Carlson Junior Conference at the 
University of Minnesota, the New York University (NYU) Stern Market 
Microstructure Conference, the Second Sustainable Architecture for Fi- 
nance in Europe (SAFE) Market Microstructure Conference, the Colorado 
Front Range Finance Seminar, the Bank of Canada—Laurier Market Struc- 
ture conference, the Telfer Annual Conference on Accounting and Finance, 
the Wabash River Conference at Indiana University, the Smokey Mountain 
Conference at the University of Tennessee, the 2019 Financial Intermedia- 
tion Research Society (FIRS) Conference, and the Conference on Financial 
Stability Implications of New Technology organized by the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Atlanta and Georgia State University. This research is supported 
by National Science Foundation grant 1,352,936 (jointly with the Oﬃce of 
Financial Research at the US Department of the Treasury) and National 
Science Foundation grant 1,838,183. 
∗ Corresponding author. 
1. Introduction 
In decades past, specialists on the New York Stock Ex- 
change and dealers on Nasdaq provided liquidity to other 
traders by buying when other traders sell and selling when 
other traders buy. These traditional liquidity providers 
have almost disappeared in modern electronic markets 
( Clark-Joseph et al., 2017 ). Anyone can supply liquidity, but 
no one is obligated to provide it. Providing liquidity sim- 
ply means posting a limit order (an offer to buy or sell 
at a speciﬁed price). A trade occurs when another trader 
(a liquidity demander) uses a market order to accept the 
terms of a posted offer. In the new ecosystem of voluntary 
liquidity supply, who provides liquidity and who demands 
liquidity, and when? 
One hypothesis is that high-frequency traders (HFTs) 
become natural liquidity providers in modern elec- 
tronic markets, because they incur lower operating costs 
E-mail address: maoye@illinois.edu (M. Ye). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2021.04.020 
0304-405X/Published by Elsevier B.V. 

===== PAGE 2 =====

S. Li, X. Wang and M. Ye Journal of Financial Economics 141 (2021) 968–980 
( Carrion, 2013 ), adverse selection costs ( Hoffmann, 2014 ), 
and inventory costs ( Brogaard et al., 2015 ; Aït-Sahalia and 
Sa ˘glam, 2017 ). These cost advantages imply that HFTs 
should win the price competition in liquidity provision. 
Surprisingly, Yao and Ye (2018) ﬁnd the opposite: Non- 
HFTs tend to quote more aggressive prices than HFTs. 
Who, then, are these non-HFTs and why can they undercut 
HFTs? 
A more complex challenge is that no types of traders 
consistently dominate liquidity provision. For example, 
Yao and Ye (2018) and O’Hara et al. (2018) ﬁnd that HFTs 
provide relatively more liquidity for low-priced stocks 
and that non-HFTs provide relatively more liquidity for 
high-priced stocks. Yao and Ye (2018) show that non-HFTs 
provide more liquidity as adverse selection risk increases. 
Therefore, who provides liquidity depends endogenously 
on security characteristics. Traditional market microstruc- 
ture theory usually exogenously assigns who provides 
liquidity. Then, what drives the cross-sectional variations 
on who provides liquidity? 
One key to addressing these questions is to explore un- 
charted territory: algorithmic traders who are not HFTs. 
To minimize transaction costs, buy-side institutions, such 
as mutual funds and pension funds, use computer algo- 
rithms extensively to execute their trades ( Frazzini et al., 
2018 ; O’Hara, 2015 ). Although execution algorithms (EAs) 
are key players in the ﬁnancial ecosystem ( Hasbrouck and 
Saar, 2013 ), they lack an independent identity in exist- 
ing models. According to one view, ﬁnancial markets in- 
clude HFTs and everyone else, with the latter covering 
both sophisticated institutions and unsophisticated retail 
traders [see the survey by O’Hara (2015) ]. According to the 
other view, algorithmic traders and HFTs are interchange- 
able [see the survey by Biais and Foucault (2014) ]. The 
stark simplicity of these classiﬁcations has proved valu- 
able and appropriate for studying basic foundational ques- 
tions about machine-human interactions, but the same di- 
chotomy prevents the study of interactions between differ- 
ent types of algorithms, and such machine-machine inter- 
actions are the key to understanding the current structure 
of ﬁnancial markets. 
Our model captures two fundamental differences 
between EAs and HFTs ( Hasbrouck and Saar, 2013 ; 
O’Hara, 2015 ). First, EAs can use limit orders to provide liq- 
uidity, but their goal is to minimize transaction costs, not 
to proﬁt from bid-ask spreads ( Hasbrouck and Saar, 2013 ; 
Jones, 2013 ). Second, EAs are fast, but they are slower 
than HFTs ( O’Hara, 2015 ). The differences in incentives and 
trading speed between algorithms are the main drivers of 
our model. EAs enjoy lower opportunity costs for provid- 
ing liquidity because they must complete a trade. EAs can 
lose money when providing liquidity as long as the loss is 
lower than paying the bid-ask spread. We ﬁnd that EAs al- 
ways choose to provide liquidity at more aggressive prices 
than HFTs if pricing is continuous. In reality, pricing is dis- 
crete. For example, the US Securities and Exchange Com- 
mission (SEC) Regulation National Market Systems (Reg 
NMS) Rule 612 mandates a uniform tick size (minimum 
price variation) of 1 cent for any quote above $1. Discrete 
pricing increases the cost to EAs of narrowing the bid-ask 
spread. At the extreme, EAs cannot undercut HFTs at all if 
the bid-ask spread is binding at one tick. Under discrete 
pricing, we discover three types of equilibria, thereby of- 
fering testable predictions regarding who provides liquidity 
and when. 
Our model contains N competitive HFTs who have no 
private value to trade. HFTs provide or demand liquidity to 
maximize their expected trading proﬁts. Non-HFTs arrive 
at the market following a Poisson process, bringing inelas- 
tic demand to buy or sell one unit of a security. A frac- 
tion β of non-HFTs are EAs, and they can choose between 
limit and market orders to minimize transaction costs, and 
the remaining non-HFTs are market order traders (MOTs). 
When β = 0 , our model degenerates into the Budish et al. 
(2015 ; BCS hereafter) framework, in which all non-HFTs 
must demand liquidity. MOTs have to pay a positive bid- 
ask spread even if the fundamental value of a security 
is public information. The positive bid-ask spread results 
from the sniping risk: The quote from an HFT can be 
sniped by N −1 equally fast HFTs during value jumps. 
Once we allow non-HFTs to provide liquidity, they 
never demand liquidity when pricing is continuous, be- 
cause the following strategy dominates demanding liquid- 
ity. Suppose that an EA buyer submits a limit order at 
price ε above the fundamental value. Her order immedi- 
ately stimulates HFTs to submit market orders to collect ε
as proﬁt. The EA loses ε, but the loss is lower than the bid- 
ask spread when ε is suﬃciently small. HFTs immediately 
accept a lower price than the ask price, because accept- 
ing an offer does not expose them to a sniping risk. Under 
continuous pricing, our model generates only one type of 
equilibrium, in which EAs provide liquidity to HFTs at the 
fundamental value and HFTs immediately accept the offer. 
The EA’s limit order executes immediately like a market or- 
der and does not rest in the limit order book (LOB). HFTs, 
therefore, provide liquidity to MOTs. 
When pricing becomes discrete, our model generates 
three types of equilibria because discrete pricing creates 
rents for both providing and demanding liquidity. When 
the sniping risk is very low relative to the tick size, the 
breakeven bid-ask spread can drop below one tick. The 
difference between the one tick–mandated bid-ask spread 
and the breakeven bid-ask spread becomes rents for pro- 
viding liquidity, and speed allocates these rents to HFTs. In 
the ﬁrst type of equilibrium, the queuing equilibrium, HFTs 
dominate liquidity provision because they can achieve time 
priority at the constrained one-tick bid-ask spread. This 
prediction is consistent with Yao and Ye (2018) , who ﬁnd 
that HFTs dominate liquidity provision when either the ad- 
verse selection risk is too low or the tick size is too large. 
The second and the third type of equilibria occur when 
the breakeven spread for HFTs becomes wider than one 
tick. EAs can place limit orders within the spread, but 
they can no longer stimulate HFTs at the fundamental 
value. Instead, they need to cross the fundamental value 
to stimulate HFTs. The difference between the price that 
HFTs accept and the fundamental value is the rent for 
HFTs to demand liquidity and the loss for EAs to stimu- 
late HFTs. EAs’ choices then depend on whether such loss 
is larger than the loss from improving the breakeven bid- 
ask spread. Fig. 1 shows that the second and third type 
of equilibria rotates with parameter values. The second 
969 

===== PAGE 3 =====

S. Li, X. Wang and M. Ye Journal of Financial Economics 141 (2021) 968–980 
Fig. 1. Parameter ranges of the equilibria for the example of tick size /Delta1= 1 
3 . When sniping risks are very low, high-frequency traders (HFTs) quote a 
one-tick bid-ask spread and provide liquidity to all execution algorithms (EAs) and market order traders (MOTs) ( Proposition 3 , queuing equilibrium). 
When sniping risks are higher, HFTs widen their quoted spreads and provide liquidity to MOTs only. The regions in which HFTs quote differing spreads 
are separated by solid lines. Within each region, EAs choose between stimulating HFTs ( Proposition 4 , stimulating equilibrium) and undercutting HFTs 
( Proposition 5 , undercutting equilibrium) depending on the parameters. When the tick size is not binding, the undercutting equilibrium alternates with the 
stimulating equilibrium with respect to π and β. m is the number of tick grids between the midpoint and the ask price, and h is the half bid-ask spread. 
type of equilibrium, the undercutting equilibrium, arises 
when the breakeven ask (bid) price is close to the price 
grid below (above). As the loss incurred by improving the 
breakeven spread is small, EAs choose to undercut the 
breakeven spread and provide liquidity to other non-HFTs. 
The third type of equilibrium, the stimulating equilibrium, 
arises when the breakeven ask (bid) price is far from the 
price grid below (above). As the cost for improving the 
breakeven ask and bid prices is higher than stimulating 
HFTs, EAs choose to cross the midpoint to stimulate HFTs. 
HFTs then race to take liquidity to capture the rents from 
demanding liquidity. In the stimulating equilibrium, EAs 
provide liquidity to HFTs, and HFTs provide liquidity to 
MOTs because limit orders from EAs never stay in the LOB. 
By opening the door to exploring the diversity of com- 
puter algorithms, our paper not only develops new pre- 
dictions but also generates new perceptions. Machine- 
machine interaction blurs the distinction between provid- 
ing and demanding liquidity. By deﬁnition, an EA provides 
liquidity because she uses a limit order, but her goal is to 
trigger immediate market orders from HFTs. In this sense, 
the EA demands liquidity because her stimulating limit or- 
der executes like a market order. HFTs use market orders, 
but they satisfy the EA’s trading needs. In this sense, HFTs 
provide liquidity even though they take quotes from EAs. 
After blurring the distinction between providing and 
demanding liquidity, this machine-machine interaction 
also makes it challenging to measure liquidity. Traditional 
liquidity measures, such as the bid-ask spread and depth, 
are based on orders resting on the LOB. Our model shows 
that the liquidity offered by the LOB can move in the 
opposite direction of true liquidity. Consider the case in 
which pricing is continuous. The bid-ask spread increases 
as the fraction of EAs increases because fewer non-HFTs 
take liquidity from HFTs. The average transaction costs that 
non-HFTs incur decline, however, because more EAs enjoy 
zero transaction costs. At the extreme, the bid-ask spread 
reaches its widest magnitude when all non-HFTs are EAs, 
but the market becomes inﬁnitely liquid because non-HFTs 
always choose to stimulate HFTs when no transaction costs 
exist. 
The discrete pricing channel of speed competition rec- 
onciles a number of contradictions between existing chan- 
nels of speed competition and empirical facts, for both 
supplying liquidity and demanding liquidity. Regarding 
supplying liquidity, Carrion (2013) , Hoffmann (2014) , and 
Brogaard et al. (2015) show that speed reduces HFTs’ 
intermediation costs, particularly adverse selection costs. 
Such reduced costs should give HFTs a competitive ad- 
vantage in providing liquidity for stocks that are subject 
to higher adverse selection risk ( Han et al., 2014 ). In ad- 
dition, when the tick size is small, HFTs face less con- 
straint in offering better prices and they should there- 
fore crowd out liquidity provision by non-HFTs. Yao and 
Ye (2018) ﬁnd, however, that an increase in adverse se- 
lection risk reduces HFTs’ share in liquidity provision 
and that a small tick size crowds out liquidity provision 
from HFTs. The discrete pricing channel helps to recon- 
cile these apparent contradictions. EAs can provide liquid- 
ity at better prices because they enjoy lower opportunity 
costs for doing so. Lower adverse selection risk or larger 
tick size, however, reduces the breakeven spread to be- 
low one tick and lead to speed competition at constrained 
prices. 
Liquidity demand from HFTs usually has a nega- 
tive connotation because, in existing models, HFTs typi- 
cally adversely select liquidity providers when they de- 
mand liquidity (BCS; Foucault et al., 2017 ; Menkveld and 
Zoican, 2017 ). In our model, EAs use aggressive limit or- 
ders to stimulate HFTs. HFTs demand liquidity, but they do 
970 

===== PAGE 4 =====

S. Li, X. Wang and M. Ye Journal of Financial Economics 141 (2021) 968–980 
not adversely select EAs. Instead, the transaction costs that 
EAs pay are lower when HFTs demand liquidity than when 
HFTs provide liquidity. This surprising prediction could ex- 
plain why Latza et al. (2014) ﬁnd that limit orders executed 
within 50 milliseconds after submission incur no adverse 
selection costs. 
The closest paper to ours is BCS. We relax two assump- 
tions made in BCS. First, because non-HFTs in BCS can use 
only market orders, the sniping risk leads to a positive bid- 
ask spread, motivating BCS to recommend frequent batch 
auctions. Our model shows that when all non-HFTs can 
choose between limit and market orders, transaction costs 
drop to zero once pricing is continuous. Second, we re- 
lax their assumption of continuous pricing and show that 
discrete pricing generates an arms race in speed. There- 
fore, BCS argue for a more discrete market with respect 
to time, while as an alternative, we posit a more contin- 
uous market with respect to pricing. Our insight under- 
mines the rationale for increasing the tick size to 5 cents 
as proposed by the 2012 US Jumpstart Our Business Star- 
tups (JOBS) Act and the SEC’s 2016 tick size pilot program. 
Proponents of increasing the tick size argue that a larger 
tick size increases liquidity, discourages HFTs, increases 
market-making proﬁts, supports sell-side equity research, 
and, eventually, increases the number of initial public of- 
ferings (IPOs) ( Weild et al., 2012 ). Our results show that an 
increase in the tick size reduces liquidity, encourages speed 
racing between HFTs, and allocates resources to latency re- 
duction. 
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 sets up the 
model. Section 3 presents the results when the price 
is continuous, and all non-HFTs use market orders. In 
Section 4 we allow some non-HFTs to use limit orders but 
keep price continuous and compare with the results in 
Section 3 . In Section 5 , we add one more realistic feature 
to our model: discrete pricing. Section 6 contains empiri- 
cal predictions and policy implications. Section 7 concludes 
with a discussion for future research. 
2. Model 
We consider a continuous-time trading model with an 
inﬁnite horizon. There is one security, and its fundamental 
value v t is common knowledge, t ∈ [ 0 , ∞ ) , with v 0 = 0 . 
There are two types of traders: HFTs and non-HFTs. All 
traders are risk-neutral, and there is no time discounting. 
There are N ( 2 ≤ N ≤∞  ) HFTs always present in the mar- 
ket with the goal of maximizing expected trading proﬁts. 
Every non-HFT has an inelastic need to buy or sell one 
unit of a security. A fraction β of non-HFTs can choose 
between limit and market orders to minimize transaction 
costs. These are the EAs. The remaining fraction of 1 − β
non-HFTs, MOTs, use only market orders upon arrival. 
As in BCS, non-HFTs arrive at the market at Poisson in- 
tensity λI , and the asset’s fundamental value, v t , evolves 
as a compound Poisson jump process with arrival rate λJ . 
Therefore, at any time t, with probability π = 
λJ 
λI + λJ the 
next event is a value jump, and with probability 1 − π the 
next event is an arrival of a non-HFT. During the value 
jump, the fundamental value of the security, v t , increases 
to v t + 1 or decreases to v t −1 with equal probability. 
Upon arrival, non-HFTs buy or sell with equal probability. 
Therefore, the probability that the next event is the arrival 
of a buy MOT is 1 
2 ( 1 − β)( 1 − π) . 
The stock exchange operates as a continuous LOB. Each 
trade in the LOB requires a liquidity provider and a liq- 
uidity demander. The liquidity provider submits a limit or- 
der, which is an offer to buy or sell at a speciﬁed price 
and quantity. The liquidity demander accepts the price and 
quantity of a limit order. Execution precedence for liquid- 
ity providers follows price-time priority. Limit orders with 
higher buy or lower sell prices execute before less aggres- 
sive limit orders. For limit orders queuing at the same 
price, orders arriving earlier execute before later orders. 
HFTs are all equally fast, and their order messages (limit 
orders, market orders, or cancelations) are processed seri- 
ally in random order if those messages arrive at the ex- 
change at the same time. 
As in BCS, v t is common knowledge, but liquidity 
providers are subject to a sniping risk if they fail to up- 
date their stale quotes following value jumps. EAs are al- 
ways subject to such a sniping risk because they are slower 
than HFTs, but an HFT is also subject to a sniping risk with 
a positive probability because other HFTs are equally fast. 
In equilibrium, sniping stale quotes are always proﬁtable, 
and we allow an HFT to snipe her own quotes because it 
is economically equivalent to order cancelation. 
The LOB contains all outstanding limit orders. Outstand- 
ing orders to buy are called bids, and outstanding orders 
to sell are called asks. In this paper, we focus on the high- 
est bid and the lowest ask around v t , which are called the 
best bid and ask. To simplify exposition, we assume that a 
limit order is canceled if it has no chance of trading with 
a non-HFT before the next jump occurs. This simpliﬁcation 
rules out the trivial strategy of laying the book, that is, at- 
tempting to satiate all bid price levels below v t −1 or all 
ask price levels above v t + 1 , because such pricing levels 
involve no sniping risk at time t. 
3. Continuous-pricing model without EAs 
When β = 0 , all non-HFTs use market orders, and our 
model essentially degenerates into the BCS framework. 
We use this section as a benchmark for evaluating, in 
Sections 4 and 5 , the impact of allowing non-HFTs to pro- 
vide liquidity. 
Let h be the HFTs’ quoted half bid-ask spread. We con- 
sider, without loss of generality, the expected payoff for an 
HFT’s sell limit order at v t + h if the HFT posts the ﬁrst 
share at this price. When a buy event occurs, this sell or- 
der has the following expected payoff: 
( 1 − π) · h − N −1 
N 
π · ( 1 − h ) + 
1 
N 
π ·0 . (1) 
Conditional on the occurrence of a buy event, with 
probability 1 − π a non-HFT takes the limit order and the 
payoff is h , and with probability π v t jumps upward by one 
and all HFTs race to snipe stale quotes on the ask side. 
HFTs are equally fast, so the probability that an HFT order 
is sniped by other HFTs is N−1 
N . The loss for being sniped 
is ( v t + 1 ) − ( v t + h ) = 1 − h . 
971 

===== PAGE 5 =====

S. Li, X. Wang and M. Ye Journal of Financial Economics 141 (2021) 968–980 
An HFT’s outside option beyond providing liquidity is 
to snipe the share when v t jumps. The value for this out- 
side option is zero when a non-HFT takes the share before 
the value jumps. When v t jumps upward, each HFT has a 
1 
N chance of sniping the share and the payoff for the suc- 
cessful sniper is ( v t + 1 ) − ( v t + h ) = 1 − h . Therefore, the 
expected payoff for a sniper at v t + h is 
1 
N 
π · ( 1 − h ) . (2) 
In equilibrium, HFTs should be indifferent between liq- 
uidity provision and stale quote sniping. Thus, the equilib- 
rium half bid-ask spread is the value h = h 0 , which solves 
( 1 − π) · h − N −1 
N 
π · ( 1 − h ) = 
1 
N 
π · ( 1 − h ) . (3) 
The best bid and ask prices contain only one share be- 
cause undercutting h 0 or quoting a second share at h 0 loses 
money. We summarize the equilibrium in Proposition 1 . 
Proposition 1 . When non-HFTs cannot supply liquidity, the 
equilibrium half bid-ask spread under continuous pricing is 
h 0 = π . 
HFTs almost always maintain one unit in the LOB at the 
ask price v t + h 0 and one unit at the bid price v t − h 0 . 1 The 
bid and ask prices can belong to different HFTs. 
(i) Upon arrival, non-HFTs demand liquidity from HFTs 
and pay h 0 . 
(ii) When v t jumps up (down), all HFTs race to take stale 
ask (bid) quotes. 
The positive transaction cost h 0 results from the sniping 
risk (BCS). 2 Next, we show that non-HFTs can avoid such 
costs completely as long as they can use limit orders. 
4. Continuous-pricing model with EAs 
In this section, we relax only one assumption made in 
BCS. We allow a fraction of β > 0 of non-HFTs to provide 
liquidity. EAs’ objective function is to minimize expected 
transaction costs, and they can update their orders at any 
time. 3 
After we allow non-HFTs to provide liquidity, they never 
demand liquidity from HFTs under continuous pricing be- 
cause crossing the midpoint strictly dominates paying HFTs 
a half-spread. When an EA submits a buy limit order at 
v t + ε, the order immediately stimulates HFTs to demand 
liquidity because HFTs make a proﬁt of ε by selling above 
the fundamental value. EA loses ε by providing liquidity, 
but the cost is lower if ε < h . Therefore, EAs never demand 
liquidity from HFTs. 
The foregoing discussion reveals two new economic 
mechanisms. The ﬁrst mechanism is the opportunity cost 
of liquidity provision. EAs can afford more aggressive limit 
order prices than HFTs because EAs enjoy a negative op- 
portunity cost for providing liquidity. EAs’ outside option 
1 HFTs’ stale quotes can be sniped during value jumps, but HFTs imme- 
diately replenish the share around the new fundamental value. 
2 Aquilina, Budish, and O’Neill (2020) quantify return from the sniping. 
3 As our paper focus on costs led by the sniping risk, we assume away 
delay costs for EAs ( Parlour, 1998 ; Foucault, 1999 ; Foucault, Kadan, and 
Kandel, 2005 ). 
for providing liquidity is to demand liquidity by paying h . 
Therefore, EAs can afford buy limit orders at price v t + ε
as long as the loss is less than h . HFTs do not provide liq- 
uidity if they lose money. What is more, HFTs incur a pos- 
itive opportunity cost for providing liquidity. When an HFT 
chooses to provide liquidity, she cannot proﬁt from snip- 
ing the share, and the probability of sniping conditional on 
a value jump is 1 
N . This positive opportunity cost is equal 
to HFTs’ reduced sniping cost relative to the cost to EAs. 4 
Therefore, EAs can afford more aggressive quotes than HFTs 
for any of the model’s parameter values. 
The second mechanism, the make-take spread, captures 
the difference in prices between a trader’s willingness to 
post an offer and her willingness to accept an offer. An 
HFT quoting an ask price of v t + h would accept any buy 
limit price v t + ε ( ε → 0 ). HFTs accept a worse price than 
the price they offer because accepting an order incurs no 
sniping risk. In our model, an HFT seller accepts any offer 
at or above v t , but she quotes v t + h . As a consequence, the 
EA’s buy limit order at v t + ε executes immediately like a 
market order. 
We discover the make-take spread because we allow 
traders to switch between providing and demanding liq- 
uidity at any time. Models with market makers, such as 
those used in Kyle (1985) and Glosten and Migrom (1985) , 
exogenously assign the liquidity-provider and liquidity- 
demander roles. In LOB literature [ Foucault et al. (2005) , 
among others], traders can choose limit orders or market 
orders upon arrival, but they can no longer update their 
roles after the initial decision. 
Proposition 2 characterizes the equilibrium. In the equi- 
librium, EAs always choose limit order prices at v t and 
HFTs immediately demand liquidity once EAs submit such 
limit orders. EAs provide liquidity to HFTs, but the LOB 
contains no resting limit orders placed by the EAs. HFTs 
provide liquidity to MOTs by quoting one share at v t + h β
and one share at v t − h β. The half-spread h β equalizes the 
payoff of liquidity provision and stale quote sniping for 
HFTs, which is given by 
( 1 − β) ( 1 − π) 
( 1 − β) ( 1 − π) + π · h − N −1 
N 
π
( 1 − β) ( 1 − π) + π
· ( 1 − h ) = 
1 
N 
π
( 1 − β) ( 1 − π) + π · ( 1 − h ) . (4) 
The left-hand side of Eq. (4) is the HFT seller’s liquidity- 
provision proﬁt conditional on a trade’s occurring at the 
ask, and the right-hand side is a sniper’s proﬁt. The only 
difference between Eq. (4) and Eq. (3) is the factor ( 1 − β) 
[ Eq. (4) degenerates into Eq. (3) when β = 0 ]. We call 
Proposition 2 the stimulating equilibrium because EAs, 
who have an internal need to trade, use aggressive limit 
orders to stimulate HFTs to demand liquidity. 
Proposition 2 . (stimulating equilibrium). With a tick size of 
zero and a positive fraction of EAs ( β > 0 ), the equilibrium 
half bid-ask spread is h β = π
1 −β( 1 −π) . 
4 During value jumps, an HFT is sniped with probability of N−1 
N and an 
EA is sniped with probability of one. 
972 

===== PAGE 6 =====

S. Li, X. Wang and M. Ye Journal of Financial Economics 141 (2021) 968–980 
(i) HFTs almost always maintain one unit in the LOB at 
the ask price v t + h β and one unit at the bid price v t −
h β. 
(ii) EAs submit limit orders at v t when they arrive and all 
HFTs immediately demand liquidity at v t . 
(iii) When v t jumps up (down), all HFTs race to take stale 
limit orders at the ask (bid) price . 
In the existing literature, when HFTs demand liq- 
uidity, they usually adversely select other traders (BCS; 
Menkveld and Zoican, 2017 ; Foucault et al., 2017 ). Con- 
sequently, liquidity demand from HFTs often has negative 
connotations. Our model shows that HFTs can demand liq- 
uidity without adversely selecting other traders. Instead, 
transaction costs are lower for EAs when HFTs demand liq- 
uidity than when EAs demand liquidity from HFTs. There- 
fore, researchers and policymakers should not evaluate the 
welfare impact of HFTs based simply on whether they pro- 
vide or demand liquidity. 
Proposition 2 also shows that the deﬁnitions of pro- 
viding and demanding liquidity blur when a machine in- 
teracts with another machine. Technically, EAs are liquid- 
ity providers in equilibrium because they use limit orders, 
but the goal of their limit orders is to immediately attract 
HFTs to submit market orders. Therefore, HFTs economi- 
cally provide liquidity to EAs even though the HFTs use 
market orders. 
The blurring of the distinction between providing and 
demanding liquidity has, in turn, a signiﬁcant impact on 
how liquidity is measured. When more non-HFTs use limit 
orders, competitive HFTs receive fewer order ﬂows and 
have to quote wider bid-ask spreads for the remaining 
market orders. Therefore, h β > h 0 > 0 . Despite an increase 
in the bid-ask spread, Corollary 1 shows that the total 
transaction costs for non-HFTs decrease, because EAs never 
pay the bid-ask spread. Let ¯C (β) denote the weighted av- 
erage transaction cost for all non-HFTs. We then have 
¯C ( β) = β ·0 + ( 1 − β) · h β = 
( 1 − β) π
1 − β( 1 − π) 
. (5) 
Corollary 1 . The half-spread h β strictly increases in β and 
¯C (β) strictly decreases in β. When β → 1 , h β → 1 and 
¯C (β) → 0 . 
Corollary 1 shows that the quoted bid-ask spread, a 
common measure of liquidity, can move in the opposite 
direction of the actual transaction costs when every trader 
can provide liquidity. As the proportion of EAs’ β increases, 
the quoted bid-ask spread widens, but transaction costs 
fall. When all non-HFTs are EAs, HFTs’ half bid-ask spreads 
widen to one, the maximum possible value jump size, but 
transaction costs zero out. The transaction costs drop be- 
cause the bid-ask spread no longer represents all traders’ 
interest in satisfying the trading needs of non-HFTs. 
BCS show that continuous trading creates snip- 
ing risks and positive transaction costs for non-HFTs. 
Corollary 1 shows that their results no longer hold when 
all traders can provide liquidity. When all traders are EAs 
( β = 1 ), HFTs make zero proﬁts in equilibrium and they 
have no economic incentive to invest in speed. 5 In the next 
section, we show that discrete pricing generates rents for 
both providing and demanding liquidity, thereby triggering 
an arms race in speed. 
5. Discrete pricing 
In this section, we add another realistic feature to 
our model: discrete pricing. In Section 5.1 , we show that 
discrete pricing creates rents for providing liquidity. In 
Section 5.2 , we show that discrete pricing also creates 
rents for demanding liquidity. These rents, in turn, destroy 
the unique type of equilibrium outlined in Section 4 , in 
which EAs always provide liquidity to HFTs and HFTs al- 
ways provide liquidity to MOTs. Discrete pricing generates 
three types of equilibria depending on parameter values, 
which then lead to cross-sectional and time-series predic- 
tions regarding who provides liquidity to whom. 
We set the tick size /Delta1= 1 
L . Therefore, the tick size 
decreases as L increases. For illustration purposes, we as- 
sume that L = 1 , 2 , 3 , ··· and that v 0 is at the mid- 
point of a tick. Therefore, v t is always at the midpoint  
of the two nearest ticks and the available price grids are 
{ ··· , v t − 3/Delta1
2 , v t − /Delta1
2 , v t + /Delta1
2 , v t + 3/Delta1
2 , ··· } . 
When v t does not coincide with a pricing grid, EAs can 
no longer stimulate HFTs’ market orders at zero cost. A 
positive cost for stimulating HFTs could lead EAs to choose 
limit orders that reside in the LOB. These resting orders 
could cause an explosion in the number of states in the 
LOB because inﬁnitely many EAs will arrive in the future. 
To reduce the number of states, we make the following as- 
sumption for discrete pricing that is common in the LOB 
literature ( Foucault et al., 2005 ). 6 
Assumption 1 . Limit orders must be price-improving, that is, 
they must narrow the spread by at least one tick. 
We relax Assumption 1 in the Online Appendix and 
ﬁnd that the model’s main intuition holds with dramat- 
ically greater mathematical complexity. Assumption 1 re- 
duces the state of the LOB to 2 n , where n is the num- 
ber of price levels between HFTs’ best bid and ask prices. 
Assumption 1 is not binding under continuous pricing be- 
cause the best bid and offer contains only one share when 
pricing is continuous. Therefore, we are able to compare 
the results obtained under discrete pricing with those ob- 
tained under continuous pricing. 
Assumption 1 also rules out inﬁnite loops between 
traders. For instance, without this assumption, an EA can 
submit an unproﬁtable undercutting order to force an in- 
cumbent EA’s proﬁtable limit order to cancel. Then, the en- 
trant EA revises her undercutting order to the incumbent’s 
5 When execution algorithms can use only market orders, Li and 
Ye (2021) show that bid-ask spread is still zero if execution algorithms 
can divide their demand of one share into a series of inﬁnitesimal child 
orders. Therefore, sniping leads to positive spread under two conditions. 
First, investors cannot choose between market and limit orders. Second, 
if they can use market orders only, they face discrete lot size or other 
frictions that prevent them from slicing their orders. 
6 Goettler, Parlour, and Rajan (2005) allow limit orders to queue at the 
same price, but they have to rely on numerical solutions. 
973 

===== PAGE 7 =====

S. Li, X. Wang and M. Ye Journal of Financial Economics 141 (2021) 968–980 
proﬁtable price level. In return, the initial incumbent could 
want to ﬁght back with the same strategy. By disallowing 
a trader to worsen the quotes, including her own quotes, 
our assumption rules out such trivial loops without affect- 
ing the model’s main economic insights. 
Assumption 2 . N = ∞ . 
In Sections 3 and 4 , we show that the number of HFTs 
does not affect the equilibrium bid-ask spread quoted by 
HFTs. An increase in N reduces the value of providing liq- 
uidity because it increases the probability of being sniped. 
An increase in N, however, reduces the value of sniping 
stale quotes by the same amount because each sniper is 
less likely to be successful. Therefore, N can affect sniping 
costs and opportunity costs, but it cannot affect the sum 
of these two costs. In turn, the equilibrium bid-ask spread 
does not depend on N as long as there is more than one 
HFT. To simplify the notation, we drop N−1 
N from our ex- 
position by assuming that the number of HFTs is inﬁnite. 
Consequently, the expected sniping proﬁt for any share is 
zero, and an HFT provides liquidity as long as its expected 
proﬁt is greater than zero. 
5.1. Rents for providing liquidity and the queuing equilibrium 
Consider the extreme case when h 0 → 0 , where the 
breakeven spreads in Propositions 1 and 2 are both close to 
zero. In that case, the bid-ask spread is binding at one tick 
and the tick size becomes pure rent for providing liquidity. 
As long as the breakeven bid-ask spread is smaller than 
one tick, the difference between the mandated one-tick 
minimum spread and the breakeven spread creates rents 
for providing liquidity, and the time priority rule allocates 
such rents to HFTs. EAs are not able to provide liquidity 
because they can neither win time priority nor place limit 
orders within the bid-ask spread. Therefore, a low sniping 
risk relative to the tick size leads to a queuing equilibrium, 
in which HFTs provide liquidity to both EAs and MOTs. 
Proposition 3 . ( queuing equilibrium ). When tick size is /Delta1= 
1 
L and π ≤ /Delta1
2 ( h 0 ≤ /Delta1
2 ) , 
(i) HFTs almost always maintain one share at the ask 
price v t + /Delta1
2 and one share at the bid price v t − /Delta1
2 . 
(ii) HFTs participate in two speed races: (a) the race to 
ﬁll the queue when the depth at v t ± /Delta1
2 becomes 
zero and (b) the race to snipe all stale quotes fol- 
lowing a value jump. 
(iii) All non-HFTs use market orders to trade upon ar- 
rival. 
The queuing equilibrium has three features. First and 
most important, discrete pricing generates speed races to 
provide liquidity at v t ± /Delta1
2 because the expected proﬁt for 
providing liquidity on top of the book is higher than the 
expected proﬁt for sniping the share. When the market 
opens, each HFT sends one sell limit order at v 0 + /Delta1
2 and 
one buy limit order at v 0 − /Delta1
2 , and the winner of each race 
becomes a liquidity provider. When a non-HFT arrives and 
takes the order at v t + /Delta1
2 or v t − /Delta1
2 , HFTs race to reﬁll the 
order. 7 Following value jumps, HFTs race to provide liq- 
uidity at a half-spread of /Delta1
2 around the new fundamental 
value. 
Second, a discrete tick size forces EAs to use market or- 
ders because they cannot win the speed race. EAs never 
use market orders when pricing is continuous because 
they can use stimulating limit orders to achieve zero trans- 
action costs ( Proposition 2 ). When the tick size is discrete, 
EAs cannot submit stimulating orders at the fundamental 
value v t . If the tick size is also binding, EAs cannot sub- 
mit limit orders within the spread. EAs always use market 
orders under Proposition 3 because we assume that each 
price level can hold only one share. We show in the Online 
Appendix that the same intuition holds when each price 
level can hold more than one share. EAs never use market 
orders when pricing is continuous, but they use market or- 
ders when pricing is discrete because they can neither sub- 
mit limit orders at the fundamental value v t nor win speed 
races for top positions. 
Third, a discrete tick size increases transaction costs for 
non-HFTs. The result is straightforward for EAs because 
they pay zero transaction costs under continuous pricing 
but they need to pay the bid-ask spread under discrete 
pricing. 8 The transaction costs for all non-HFTs also in- 
crease because the average transaction cost under discrete 
pricing is higher than ¯C (0) , and Corollary 1 shows that 
¯C (0) is greater than ¯C (β) for any β > 0 . 
5.2. Rents for demanding liquidity: Stimulating and 
undercutting equilibria 
When the tick size /Delta1decreases or sniping risk π in- 
creases, the breakeven spread for HFTs is larger than the 
tick size. As HFTs lose money by providing liquidity at 
v t ± /Delta1
2 , EAs are able to submit limit orders within HFTs’ 
bid-ask spreads. Following a similar intuition expressed in 
Proposition 2 , EAs would never use market orders. EAs can 
stimulate HFTs to demand liquidity if EAs submit buy limit 
orders at v t + /Delta1
2 or sell limit orders at v t − /Delta1
2 . These stimu- 
lating limit orders strictly dominate market orders because 
/Delta1
2 is lower than the half-spread. Discrete pricing, mean- 
while, creates one new feature. 
When pricing is continuous, stimulating limit orders of- 
fer the minimum possible transaction cost of zero. When 
pricing is discrete, a stimulating limit order costs /Delta1
2 , and 
a limit order that does not cross the midpoint can cost 
less. In Proposition 2 , h β is the breakeven spread for HFTs. 
We deﬁne m as the number of tick grid points strictly in 
the interval ( v t , v t + h β ) [or equivalently in the interval 
( v t − h β, v t )]. Therefore, the tick grid immediately above 
v t + h β is v t + ( m + 1 
2 )/Delta1and the tick immediately below 
v t + h β is v t + ( m − 1 
2 )/Delta1. Lemma 1 shows that m −2 price 
7 Li, Ye, and Zheng (2021) provide empirical evidence on speed races 
between orders for front queue positions and estimate the economic 
gains from winning the races for front queue position. 
8 This result holds after we remove Assumption 1, which we do in the 
Online Appendix. Even when EAs use limit orders to queue after HFTs, 
the queue positions of EAs involve positive transaction costs. If not, HFTs 
would occupy those queue positions. Furthermore, an EA would use mar- 
ket orders if the queue were too long. 
974 

===== PAGE 8 =====

S. Li, X. Wang and M. Ye Journal of Financial Economics 141 (2021) 968–980 
positions always cost more than /Delta1
2 , leaving only two price 
positions for further consideration. For an EA seller, these 
two remaining strategies are (1) submitting a sell order 
immediately below v t + h β and (2) selling at v t + /Delta1
2 , the 
price immediately above the midpoint. 
Lemma 1 . When m > 1 , the strategy for stimulating HFTs 
strictly dominates all strategies except undercutting h β by 
one or m ticks. 
The intuition behind Lemma 1 is as follows. When an 
EA sells above v t + /Delta1
2 , she can attract only MOTs, be- 
cause EA buyers never accept an ask price above v t + /Delta1
2 . 
Proposition 2 ﬁnds that the half-spread to break even by 
attracting all MOTs is h β. An EA then loses more than one 
tick if she improves h β by more than one tick, which is 
more costly than stimulating HFTs. 
Next, we show that EAs never sell at v t + /Delta1
2 or buy at 
v t − /Delta1
2 unless m = 1 . Consequently, our model generates 
only two types of equilibria depending on the parameter 
value. In Section 5.2.1 , we present the stimulating equi- 
librium in which EAs sell at v t − /Delta1
2 or buy at v t + /Delta1
2 . In 
Section 5.2.2 , we present the undercutting equilibrium, in 
which EAs choose to improve the h β to the closest tick. 
The results reported in Fig. 1 show that stimulating equi- 
libria and undercutting equilibria alternate in parameter 
value and cover the whole parameter space outside the 
queuing equilibrium. Intuitively, an EA undercuts HFTs on 
the ask side if the breakeven ask price is less than half 
a tick away from the price grid immediately below and 
she chooses to stimulate HFTs if the breakeven ask price 
is more than half a tick away from the price grid immedi- 
ately below. 
5.2.1. Stimulating equilibrium under discrete pricing 
In the stimulating equilibrium, an EA incurs a cost of 
/Delta1v = /Delta1
2 to attract HFTs. Proposition 4 outlines the param- 
eter space in which stimulating is the optimal strategy 
in equilibrium. A trader’s strategy involves her response 
to all states of the LOB, even if such states do not ap- 
pear in equilibrium. To conserve space and convey the 
main economic intuition, we describe only traders’ best re- 
sponses in the equilibrium path while deferring their off- 
equilibrium strategies to the proof. 
Proposition 4 . ( stimulating equilibrium un- 
der discrete pricing ) . When m = 1 and π ≥
β+2 −β/Delta1−
√ 
( /Delta1+1 ) 2 β2 +( 4 −12/Delta1) β+4 
2 β or m ≥ 2 and h β −
( m − 1 
2 )/Delta1≥ /Delta1v , 
(i) HFTs almost always maintain one share at the ask 
price v t + ( m + 1 
2 )/Delta1and one share at the bid price 
v t − ( m + 1 
2 )/Delta1. 
(ii) EA buyers submit limit orders at v t + /Delta1
2 and EA sell- 
ers submit limit orders at v t − /Delta1
2 . 
(iii) HFTs participate in three speed races: (a) the race 
to snipe all stale quotes following value jumps, (b) 
the race to ﬁll the queue when the depth at v t ±
( m + 1 
2 )/Delta1becomes zero, and (c) the race to take the 
liquidity offered by EAs. 
Proposition 4 is highly intuitive when m ≥ 2 . In the 
stimulating equilibrium, the cost of stimulating HFTs ( /Delta1
2 ) 
must be lower than the cost of undercutting h β to the clos- 
est tick. When m ≥ 2 , undercutting h β to the closest tick 
attracts MOTs and HFT snipers but not other EAs. There- 
fore, the EA faces the same order ﬂows as that for HFTs in 
Proposition 2 . The breakeven half-spread for providing liq- 
uidity to all MOTs is h β. An EA then loses h β − ( m − 1 
2 )/Delta1
when she narrows the spread to the closest tick. Therefore, 
the EA chooses to stimulate HFTs when h β − ( m − 1 
2 )/Delta1≥
/Delta1v . The intuition holds similarly when m = 1 , although the 
formula for the boundary becomes more complex, because 
the EA has to quote at v t ± /Delta1
2 if she chooses to narrow the 
spread, and the quote now attracts other EAs. 
In the stimulating equilibrium, EAs leave no limit orders 
on the book. Facing no competition in liquidity provision 
from EAs, HFTs provide liquidity to all MOTs. Even if the 
tick size is not binding, discrete pricing still creates rents 
for liquidity provision because HFTs now quote an ask 
price of v t + ( m + 1 
2 )/Delta1and a bid price of v t − ( m + 1 
2 )/Delta1. 
As ( m + 1 
2 )/Delta1> h β by deﬁnition, HFTs still race to the top 
queue position to capture the rent created by the tick 
size. 
The new insight from Proposition 4 is that the tick size 
generates rents and speed competition for demanding liq- 
uidity. When pricing is continuous, EAs can place limit or- 
ders at v t . When pricing is discrete, EAs need to pay /Delta1
2 
more to attract HFTs, and HFTs race to demand liquidity to 
capture this rent. This race does not exist under continu- 
ous pricing because EAs leave no rents for HFTs. This race 
also does not exist under a queuing equilibrium because 
no price level exists at which to submit stimulating limit 
orders. 
5.2.2. Undercutting equilibrium 
In the undercutting equilibrium, the cost that EAs 
pay to sell at v t + ( m − 1 
2 )/Delta1or buy at v t − ( m − 1 
2 )/Delta1is 
less than /Delta1
2 . Therefore, the LOB can contain limit or- 
ders placed by EAs, and traders’ strategies depend on the 
number of limit orders that EAs place on the LOB. We 
use ( i 1 
t , i 2 
t , ··· , i m 
t , j m 
t , ··· , j 2 
t , j 1 
t ) to denote the state 
of the LOB, where i k 
t , j k 
t ∈ { 0 , 1 } with 1 ≤ k ≤ m and k ∈ 
N + indicate the depth at prices v t + ( m + 1 
2 − k )/Delta1and v t −
( m + 1 
2 − k )/Delta1, which are the prices k ticks below (above) 
HFT’s ask (bid) in Proposition 4 . 
Fortunately, the proof of Proposition 5 shows that EAs 
never improve HFTs by more than one tick in equilibrium. 
For any equilibrium states of the LOB, EAs choose to sell 
at v t + ( m − 1 
2 )/Delta1or to buy at v t − ( m − 1 
2 )/Delta1if these price 
levels contain no other limit orders. In turn, i k 
t = j k 
t = 0 for 
all 2 ≤ k ≤ m always holds in equilibrium. Therefore, HFTs 
face four states of the LOB in equilibrium depending on the 
value of i 1 
t and j 1 
t . Instead of ( i 1 
t , 0 , ··· , 0 , 0 , ··· , 0 , j 1 
t ) , 
for simplicity we use ( i, j ) to represent each equilibrium 
state of the LOB, where i represents the number of EAs 
who quote a half-spread of ( m − 1 
2 )/Delta1on the ask side and 
j denotes the number of EAs who quote a half-spread of 
( m − 1 
2 )/Delta1on the bid side. The core of Proposition 5 char- 
acterizes HFTs’ best response for each event and in each 
975 

===== PAGE 9 =====

S. Li, X. Wang and M. Ye Journal of Financial Economics 141 (2021) 968–980 
Fig. 2. Markov transition between limit order book (LOB) states and payoffs from the point of view of high-frequency trader (HFT) liquidity providers on 
the ask side. For instance, in the undercutting equilibrium when m = 1 , HFTs quote at v t ± 3/Delta1
2 and execution algorithms (EAs) can submit undercutting 
orders at v t ± /Delta1
2 . In state ( i, j ) , the number of undercutting EA sell orders at v t + /Delta1
2 is i , and the number of buy orders at v t − /Delta1
2 is j. EB and ES represent 
the arrival of EAs’ buy and sell limit orders, MB and MS represent the arrival of market order traders’ (MOTs’) buy and sell market orders, and UJ and DJ 
denote upward and downward value jumps. The arrows between states represent state transitions, and arrows pointing toward the outside represent either 
order executions or cancelations. The number next to each event is the immediate payoff to HFTs from the event. 
equilibrium state ( i, j ) . The four states of the LOB are 
( 0 , 0 ) No limit order from EAs , 
( 1 , 0 ) An EA sell limit order at v t + 
(
m − 1 
2 
)
/Delta1only , 
( 0 , 1 ) An EA buy limit order at v t −
(
m − 1 
2 
)
/Delta1only , and 
( 1 , 1 ) EA limit orde rs on both v t + 
(
m − 1 
2 
)
/Delta1and v t −
(
m − 1 
2 
)
/Delta1. (6) 
Denote the HFTs’ expected value by supplying liquidity 
in state ( i, j ) as L P ( i, j ) (m ) . Fig. 2 shows that L P ( i, j ) (m ) de- 
pends on the expected value of all other states of the LOB. 
For example, consider L P ( 0 , 0 ) (m ) for an HFT on the ask side 
of the LOB. 9 
(1) An EA buyer (EB) undercuts the bid side at v t −
( m − 1 
2 )/Delta1and changes L P ( 0 , 0 ) (m ) to L P ( 0 , 1 ) (m ) . 
(2) An EA seller (ES) undercuts the ask side at v t + 
( m − 1 
2 )/Delta1and changes L P ( 0 , 0 ) (m ) to L P ( 1 , 0 ) (m ) . 
(3) An MOT buyer (MB) submits a buy market order and 
the HFT gains ( m + 1 
2 )/Delta1. 
9 HFTs make independent decisions on the bid and ask sides. HFTs’ best 
response on the bid side can be characterized similarly. When the sniping 
risk is very high, such that ( m + 1 
2 )/Delta1> 1 , the HFTs lose zero in case (5) 
and always maintain a quote at v t ± ( m + 1 
2 )/Delta1. This happens only in the 
highest undercutting equilibrium, e.g., the m = 3 case in Fig. 1 . 
(4) An MOT seller (MS) submits a sell market order, 
HFTs race to ﬁll the bid side immediately, and 
L P ( 0 , 0 ) (m ) remains the same. 
(5) In an upward value jump (UJ), the limit order on the 
ask side loses 1 − ( m + 1 
2 )/Delta1. 
(6) In a downward value jump (DJ), the liquidity 
provider cancels the limit order, thereby changing 
L P ( 0 , 0 ) (m ) to zero. 
The ﬁrst equation in Eq. (7) summarizes the value of 
L P ( 0 , 0 ) (m ) , which depends on the six types of events and 
the values for the other three states of the book. Similarly, 
the remaining three equations describe the value for state 
L P ( 1 , 0 ) (m ) , L P ( 0 , 1 ) (m ) , and L P ( 1 , 1 ) (m ) . 
⎧ 
⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎨ 
⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎩ 
LP ( 0 , 0 ) ( m ) = p 1 LP 
( 0 , 1 ) 
( m ) + p 1 LP 
( 1 , 0 ) 
( m ) + p 2 
(
m + 1 
2 
)/Delta1
+ p 2 LP ( 0 , 0 ) ( m ) − p 3 
[
1 −
(
m + 1 
2 
)/Delta1]
+ p 3 ·0 
LP ( 1 , 0 ) ( m ) = p 1 LP 
( 1 , 1 ) 
( m ) + p 1 LP ( 1 , 0 ) ( m ) + p 2 LP 
( 0 , 0 ) 
( m ) 
+ p 2 LP ( 1 , 0 ) ( m ) − p 3 
[
1 −
(
m + 1 
2 
)/Delta1]
+ p 3 ·0 
LP ( 0 , 1 ) ( m ) = p 1 LP ( 0 , 1 ) ( m ) + p 1 LP 
( 1 , 1 ) 
( m ) + p 2 
(
m + 1 
2 
)/Delta1
+ p 2 LP 
( 0 , 0 ) 
( m ) − p 3 
[
1 −
(
m + 1 
2 
)/Delta1]
+ p 3 ·0 
LP ( 1 , 1 ) ( m ) = p 1 LP 
( 0 , 1 ) 
( m ) + p 1 LP 
( 1 , 0 ) 
( m ) + p 2 LP 
( 0 , 1 ) 
( m ) 
+ p 2 LP 
( 1 , 0 ) 
( m ) − p 3 
[
1 −
(
m + 1 
2 
)/Delta1]
+ p 3 ·0 
(7) 
where p 1 = β( 1 −π) 
2 , p 2 = ( 1 −β)( 1 −π) 
2 , and p 3 = π
2 are the 
probabilities that the next event is the arrival of an EA 
buyer (seller), the arrival of an MOT buyer (seller), and the 
976 

===== PAGE 10 =====

S. Li, X. Wang and M. Ye Journal of Financial Economics 141 (2021) 968–980 
upward (downward) jump of the fundamental value, re- 
spectively. We have LP 
( i, j ) 
(m ) = max { 0 , L P ( i, j ) (m ) } because 
HFTs can simply choose not to submit limit orders or can- 
cel existing limit orders once their expected values be- 
come negative. Proposition 5 summarizes the EAs’ and 
HFTs’ strategies in the undercutting equilibrium. To con- 
serve space, we defer their off-equilibrium strategies to the 
proof of Proposition 5 . 
Proposition 5 . ( undercutting equilibrium ) . When m = 1 
and /Delta1
2 < π < β+2 −β/Delta1−
√ 
( /Delta1+1 ) 2 β2 +( 4 −12/Delta1) β+4 
2 β or when m ≥
2 and h β − ( m − 1 
2 )/Delta1∈ ( 0 , /Delta1
2 ) , 
(i) EAs submit undercutting limit orders at price v t −
( m − 1 
2 )/Delta1to buy or v t + ( m − 1 
2 )/Delta1to sell if no existing limit 
orders sit at that price level and they use stimulating orders 
otherwise. 
(ii) The HFTs’ strategy is as follows: 
(a) HFTs provide liquidity at v t ± ( m + 1 
2 )/Delta1if 
L P ( i, j ) (m ) ≥ 0 at state ( i, j ) , and L P ( i, j ) (m ) is determined by 
the transition matrix in Eq. (7) . 
(b) HFTs race to snipe stale quotes from HFTs and EAs dur- 
ing value jumps. 
(c) HFTs race to take stimulating limit orders from EAs. 
As in Proposition 4 , the boundary of the undercutting 
equilibrium for m = 1 involves a formula that differs from 
the formula involved in the case when m > 1 . Intuitively, 
EAs provide liquidity to other EAs when m = 1 , because 
quotes of v t ± /Delta1
2 are aggressive enough to attract other 
EAs. When m > 1 , the quote from an EA no longer attracts 
other EAs, because other EAs ﬁnd that the cost of stimu- 
lating HFTs is lower. Therefore, EAs no longer trade with 
each other when m > 1 , and the quotes from EAs attract 
only MOTs. 
The undercutting equilibrium provides one explanation 
for the frequent addition and cancelation of HFTs’ quotes 
( Hasbrouck and Saar, 2013 ; Biais and Foucault, 2014 ). In 
the undercutting equilibrium, HFTs’ depth at their best 
quotes is not constant because they need to respond to 
EAs’ undercutting orders. Therefore, HFTs can update their 
quotes even if the fundamental value does not change. For 
example, when π = 1 
3 , β = 0 . 6 , and /Delta1= 1 
2 , we have m = 
1 , L P ( 0 , j ) (1) > 0 , and L P ( 1 , j ) (1) < 0 . 10 HFTs provide liquid- 
ity at a half-spread of 3 
2 /Delta1when there is no undercutting 
order, but the depth at a half-spread of 3 
2 /Delta1becomes zero 
once an undercutting order establishes price priority over 
an HFT’s order. If a market order executes against an un- 
dercutting order from an EA, HFTs again ﬁnd that provid- 
ing liquidity at a half-spread of 3 
2 /Delta1is proﬁtable and race 
to provide liquidity at such a spread. 
6. Predictions and policy implications 
By exploring the interactions between distinct types of 
trading algorithms, our paper not only rationalizes a num- 
ber of puzzles in the literature but also generates new 
testable predictions. In Section 6.1 , we summarize the pre- 
dictions that are driven mainly by liquidity-providing non- 
10 We solve these equations in the proof of Propositions 4 and 5 . 
HFTs. In Section 6.2 , we summarize the predictions that are 
driven by discrete pricing. In Section 6.3 , we discuss the 
policy implications of our paper. 
6.1. Predictions driven by liquidity-providing non-HFTs 
In Prediction 1, we posit that EAs tend to quote more 
aggressive prices than HFTs quote. 
Prediction 1 . (price priority). Non-HFTs are more likely than 
HFTs to establish price priority in liquidity provision. 
Brogaard et al. (2015) and Yao and Ye (2018) ﬁnd 
that non-HFTs are more likely than HFTs to establish 
price priority. Their results are puzzling because exist- 
ing channels suggest that HFTs should quote more ag- 
gressive prices because they incur lower adverse selec- 
tion costs [see Jones (2013) and Menkveld (2016) for sur- 
veys], lower inventory costs ( Brogaard et al., 2015 ; Aït- 
Sahalia and Sa ˘glam, 2017 ), and lower operational costs 
( Carrion, 2013 ). Our model shows that the opportunity cost 
of providing liquidity can reconcile this contradiction. EAs 
can afford to place more aggressive limit orders as long 
as they cost less to execute than market orders. There- 
fore, we show in Proposition 2 that EAs always quote more 
aggressive prices than HFTs do when pricing is continu- 
ous. Under discrete pricing, EAs also choose to establish 
price priority over HFTs as long as the tick size does not 
impose constraints that discourage EAs from undercutting 
HFTs ( Propositions 4 and 5 ). 
Prediction 2 . (negative correlation between the bid-ask 
spread and liquidity). Technology shocks that increase the 
fraction of EAs widen the bid-ask spread but reduce overall 
transaction costs. 
Black (1971, p. 30) describes a liquid market intuitively: 
The market for a stock is liquid if the following condi- 
tions hold: 
1) There are always bid and asked prices for the in- 
vestor who wants to buy or sell small amounts of 
stock immediately. 
2) The difference between the bid and asked prices 
(the spread) is always small. 
3) An investor who is buying or selling a large amount 
of stock, in the absence of special information, can 
expect to do so over a long period of time at a price 
not very different, on average, from the current mar- 
ket price. 
Conditions (1) through (3) were internally consistent 
when Black (1971) was published. At that time, most 
traders executed trades by paying the bid-ask spread to 
dealers or market makers. In the current market, every 
trader can use limit orders, and Conditions (1) through (3) 
could be internally inconsistent. As Proposition 2 implies, 
an increase in β widens the bid-ask spread because HFT 
market makers receive fewer non-HFT order ﬂows. Mean- 
while, the average transaction cost for non-HFTs falls. In 
the extreme case in which β = 1 , the market becomes in- 
ﬁnitely liquid because every trader pays zero transaction 
costs. At the same time, the bid-ask spread is at its widest. 
977 

===== PAGE 11 =====

S. Li, X. Wang and M. Ye Journal of Financial Economics 141 (2021) 968–980 
Proposition 2 and Corollary 1 suggest that the deﬁnition 
of liquidity and the measure of liquidity should be up- 
dated for modern electronic markets. Prediction 2 derives 
directly from Corollary 1 . One way to test Prediction 2 is 
to examine whether technology improvements for EAs can 
increase the bid-ask spread but reduce transaction costs 
for institutional traders (such as implementation shortfalls 
measured by ANcerno data). 
6.2. Predictions driven by discrete pricing 
When pricing is continuous, EAs always provide liquid- 
ity to HFTs, and HFTs always provide liquidity to MOTs. 
When pricing is discrete, who provides liquidity to whom 
depends on the parameter value, and this dependence gen- 
erates cross-sectional and time series predictions regarding 
liquidity provision and demand. 
Prediction 3 . (time priority versus price priority). HFTs 
crowd out liquidity provision by non-HFTs when the tick size 
is large. 
Prediction 3 derives from Proposition 3 . Chordia et al., 
644) worry that “HFTs use their speed advantage to crowd 
out liquidity supply when the tick size is small and step- 
ping in front of standing limit orders is inexpensive.” Yet 
Yao and Ye (2018) ﬁnd that HFTs crowd out non-HFTs’ liq- 
uidity supply when the tick size is large. Our paper pro- 
vides the theoretical foundation for reconciling this con- 
tradiction. EAs can quote tighter bid-ask spreads than HFTs 
because EAs incur lower opportunity costs for providing 
liquidity. A large tick size prevents non-HFTs from estab- 
lishing price priority over HFTs while helping HFTs estab- 
lish time priority over non-HFTs. Yao and Ye (2018) ﬁnd 
that the tick size is more likely to be binding for low- 
priced securities, for which a 1 cent uniform tick size leads 
to a larger relative tick size. They also ﬁnd that HFTs pro- 
vide a larger share of liquidity for low-priced securities. 
Ye et al., 2020 ﬁnd that an increase in tick size crowds out 
share repurchases by ﬁrms because they cannot win the 
speed race in liquidity provision. 11 These results are con- 
sistent with Prediction 3. 
In reality, the tick size is not the only source of con- 
strained price competition. For example, the NYSE and 
Nasdaq offer rebates to liquidity providers. When the tick 
size is binding, the rebate to liquidity providers further 
widens the effective tick size and the cum-fee bid-ask 
spread ( Chao et al., 2018 ). Technically, every trader can get 
the rebate for liquidity provision, but with discrete pricing, 
traders with high-speed capability are more likely to ob- 
tain the rebate, particularly when the tick size is binding. 
Prediction 4 . (sniping and liquidity provision). An increase 
in sniping risk reduces the share of liquidity provided by HFTs. 
We obtain Prediction 4 by comparing 
Proposition 3 with Propositions 4 and 5 . When the 
sniping risk is low, the binding bid-ask spread drives 
11 To prevent ﬁrms from inﬂating their share prices by outbidding other 
traders, SEC rule 10b-18 discourages ﬁrms from demanding liqudity in 
share repurchases. 
speed competition. If the incidence of sniping rises high 
enough, the spread is wider than one tick, allowing non- 
HFTs to undercut HFTs and reducing liquidity provision 
on the part of HFTs. One limitation of our model is that 
we consider only adverse selection led by sniping, but 
other types of adverse selection should provide the same 
economic mechanism. Generally, the breakeven bid-ask 
spread should be lower when the adverse selection risk 
is low. Once the breakeven spread falls below one tick, 
speed competition to achieve time priority should be more 
critical. 
Prediction 4 differs signiﬁcantly from predictions 
offered in the existing literature on HFTs. Prior stud- 
ies typically model HFTs as traders who can ac- 
cess information more rapidly than other traders. 
Hoffmann (2014) , Han et al. (2014) , and Bongaerts and 
Van Achter (2020) ﬁnd that HFTs incur lower sniping 
costs than non-HFTs. Therefore, an increase in the level of 
information should give HFTs a comparative advantage in 
liquidity provision. 
Yao and Ye (2018) provide evidence consistent with Pre- 
diction 4. In the cross-section, an increase in adverse se- 
lection risk reduces the fraction of liquidity provided by 
HFTs. It would be interesting to test whether Prediction 4 
holds in a time series, that is, whether, for a given secu- 
rity, HFTs provide a smaller fraction of liquidity when the 
sniping risk is high. 
Prediction 5 . ( speed competition over taking liquidity ) . 
Non-HFTs are more likely to provide liquidity at price levels 
that cross the midpoint (stimulating limit orders) than HFTs. 
HFTs are also more likely to demand liquidity from stimulat- 
ing limit orders, but they do not adversely select these orders. 
In Proposition 4 , EAs always choose to cross the mid- 
point to stimulate HFTs. Proposition 5 implies that an EA 
chooses to stimulate HFTs when another EA undercuts 
HFTs on the same side. HFTs never cross the midpoint be- 
cause this strategy loses money, but EAs can cross the mid- 
point to stimulate HFTs as long as the loss is less than the 
cost of undercutting HFTs or using market orders. 
Latza et al. (2014) ﬁnd evidence consistent with Predic- 
tion 5. They classify a market order as “fast” if it executes 
against a standing limit order that is less than 50 mil- 
liseconds old. These fast market orders should come from 
HFTs. They also ﬁnd that fast market orders often execute 
against limit orders that cross the midpoint and lead to 
virtually no permanent price impacts. Testing Prediction 5 
more directly using data that include account information 
on traders could be fruitful. 
6.3. Policy implications 
Our paper offers policy implications for both HFTs and 
the tick size. For HFTs, BCS argue for a more discrete mar- 
ket in time, whereas we argue for a more continuous mar- 
ket in pricing. We show that when all non-HFTs are EAs, 
transaction costs are zero, and no incentive exists for HFTs 
to engage in speed competition. In this sense, our paper 
supports the Kyle and Lee (2017) vision of a fully continu- 
ous market. 
978 

===== PAGE 12 =====

S. Li, X. Wang and M. Ye Journal of Financial Economics 141 (2021) 968–980 
Fig. 3. Simulation of the impacts of tick sizes on the expected execution costs with β ∼ U( 0 , 1 ) , π ∼ U( 0 , 1 ) . For each /Delta1, we draw 10 0,0 0 0 random 
combinations of ( β, π) and decide the equilibrium outcome (queuing, stimulating, or undercutting). We then calculate the expected execution cost of 
market order traders (MOTs) and execution algorithms (EAs) and take the average over all combinations of ( β, π) drawn. Both EAs and MOTs see an 
increase in execution costs with respect to the tick size /Delta1. When /Delta1→ 0 , the execution cost of EAs goes to zero because they can use stimulating orders 
at the fundamental value. 
On April 5, 2012, President Barack Obama signed the 
Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act. Section 106 (b) re- 
quires the SEC to examine the effects of tick sizes on initial 
public offerings. On October 3, 2016, the SEC implemented 
a pilot program to increase the tick size from 1 cent to 
5 cents for twelve hundred common stocks. Proponents of 
the proposal argue that a larger tick size can improve liq- 
uidity ( Weild et al., 2012 ). In Corollary 2 and Prediction 6, 
we posit that a larger tick size discourages non-HFTs from 
quoting their desired prices and increases execution costs. 
Corollary 2 . For all π , β, and /Delta1, ¯C (β) < ¯C /Delta1(β) , where 
¯C (β) ≡ ( 1 − β) h β is the average execution cost to non-HFTs 
under continuous pricing and ¯C /Delta1(β) is the cost under dis- 
crete pricing. 
Corollary 2 shows that, for any parameter, the trans- 
action cost is higher under a discrete tick size than un- 
der continuous pricing because the tick size creates rents 
for demanding and supplying liquidity. To be sure, the tick 
size is never continuous in reality. When we compare large 
and small discrete tick sizes, we are not able to directly 
compare the formulas for any parameter values because 
of the complexity of the three equilibrium types. Instead, 
we draw our two parameter values β and π from a uni- 
form distribution [ 0 , 1 ] and compute the expected transac- 
tion costs based on Propositions 3 –5 . The results reported 
in Fig. 3 show that the expected transaction cost increases 
with the tick size for both MOTs and EAs. The increase in 
the cost paid by MOTs reﬂects an increase in the bid-ask 
spread. An increase in the tick size leads to a larger in- 
crease in transaction costs incurred by EAs because a larger 
tick size not only increases the cost incurred by EAs when 
they demand liquidity but also increases those costs when 
they choose to stimulate HFTs. 
Following Corollary 2 and Fig. 3 , we derive our sixth 
prediction. 
Prediction 6 . . Discrete pricing leads to higher transaction 
costs for non-HFTs. 
Empirically, Yao and Ye (2018) and Albuquerque 
et al. (2020) ﬁnd evidence consistent with Prediction 6. 
Our model’s prediction, along with their empirical evi- 
dence, shows that an increase in the tick size harms liq- 
uidity. 
7. Conclusion 
We provide the ﬁrst model representing the behavior 
of algorithmic traders that are slower than HFTs. The in- 
teraction between these EAs and HFTs rationalizes several 
puzzles regarding who provides liquidity and when, as well 
as generates several new testable predictions. EAs incur 
lower opportunity costs than HFTs when providing liquid- 
ity. Therefore, EAs choose to provide liquidity at more ag- 
gressive prices if pricing is suﬃciently continuous. A large 
tick size constrains price competition, creates rents for liq- 
uidity provision, and encourages speed competition to cap- 
ture such rents through the time priority rule. A higher 
sniping risk increases the breakeven bid-ask spread rela- 
tive to the tick size, which allows EAs to establish price 
priority over HFTs and reduces the share of liquidity pro- 
vided by HFTs. All these predictions are consistent with the 
empirical ﬁndings of Yao and Ye (2018) . 
Our model also provides several new testable predic- 
tions. (1) EAs should not use market orders once the tick 
size becomes small enough relative to the bid-ask spread. 
(2) EAs are more likely than HFTs to provide liquidity at 
price levels that cross the midpoint, and these limit or- 
ders are more likely to be taken by HFTs almost imme- 
diately. (3) The bid-ask spread widens when technological 
shocks increase the proportion of EAs, but overall transac- 
tion costs decrease. 
979 

===== PAGE 13 =====

S. Li, X. Wang and M. Ye Journal of Financial Economics 141 (2021) 968–980 
We ﬁnd that a larger tick size increases transaction 
costs and drives an arms race in speed. These results chal- 
lenge the rationale for the recent policy proposal that has 
increased the tick size to 5 cents. Thus, we encourage reg- 
ulators to consider decreasing the tick size, particularly for 
liquid stocks. 
Current policy debates over HFTs usually follow the 
binary classiﬁcations that pit fast versus slow traders or 
computers versus humans. This dichotomy reﬂects and af- 
fects the academic literature on HFTs. Our model shows 
that this policy debate should consider diversity within 
the class of machine traders, especially regarding machines 
that are slower than HFTs but faster than humans. For ex- 
ample, we ﬁnd that EAs can cross the midpoint to stim- 
ulate HFTs to demand liquidity immediately, and the cost 
of stimulating HFTs is lower than the cost of paying the 
bid-ask spread offered by HFTs. Therefore, the impact of 
HFTs on liquidity and social welfare should not be eval- 
uated based simply on whether they demand or provide 
liquidity. We also ﬁnd that the bid-ask spread can move in 
the opposite direction of true liquidity. 
EAs in our model make only execution decisions, and 
their incentives to buy or sell are exogenous. Some other 
algorithmic traders could use computers and machine- 
learning techniques to decide whether to buy or to 
sell. Therefore, fully assessing the diversity of algorithmic 
traders and their interactions is still in the early days. Just 
as insights into human behavior from the psychology liter- 
ature spawned the ﬁeld of behavioral ﬁnance, so insights 
into algorithmic behavior could prompt an analogous blos- 
soming of research in algorithmic ﬁnance. 
References 
Aït-Sahalia, Y., Sa ˘glam, M., 2017. High-frequency market making: opti- 
mal quoting. Social Science Research Network. https://papers.ssrn. 
com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract _ id=2331613 . 
Albuquerque, R. , Song, S. , Yao, C. , 2020. The price effects of liquidity 
shocks: a study of the SEC’s tick size experiment. J Financ Econ 138 
(3), 700–724 . 
Aquilina, M. , Budish, E.B. , O’Neill, P , 2020. Quantifying the high-fre- 
quency trading “arms race”: a simple new methodology and esti- 
mates. Chicago Booth Research Paper 20-16 . 
Biais, B. , Foucault, T. , 2014. HFT and market quality. Bankers, Markets In- 
vestors 128 (1), 5–19 . 
Black, F. , 1971. Toward a fully automated stock exchange, part I. Financial 
Anal J 27 (4), 28–35 . 
Bongaerts, D., Van Achter, M., 2020. Competition among liquidity 
providers with access to high-frequency trading technology. Social 
Science Research Network. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm? 
abstract _ id=2698702 . 
Brogaard, J. , Hagströmer, B. , Nordén, L. , Riordan, R. , 2015. Trading fast and 
slow: colocation and liquidity. Rev Financ Stud 28 (12), 3407–3443 . 
Budish, E. , Cramton, P. , Shim, J. , 2015. The high-frequency trading arms 
race: frequent batch auctions as a market design response. Q J Econ 
130 (4), 1547–1621 . 
Carrion, A. , 2013. Very fast money: high-frequency trading on the Nasdaq. 
J Financ Markets 16 (4), 680–711 . 
Chao, Y. , Yao, C. , Ye, M. , 2018. Why discrete price fragments US stock ex- 
changes and disperses their fee structures. Rev Financ Stud 32 (3), 
1068–1101 . 
Chordia, T. , Goyal, A. , Lehmann, B.N. , Saar, G. , 2013. High-frequency trad- 
ing. J Financ Markets 16 (4), 637–645 . 
Clark-Joseph, A.D. , Ye, M. , Zi, C , 2017. Designated market makers still mat- 
ter: evidence from two natural experiments. J Financ Econ 126 (3), 
652–667 . 
Foucault, T. , 1999. Order ﬂow composition and trading costs in a dynamic 
limit order market. J Financ Markets 2 (2), 99–134 . 
Foucault, T. , Kadan, O. , Kandel, E. , 2005. Limit order book as a market for 
liquidity. Rev Financ Stud 18 (4), 1171–1217 . 
Foucault, T. , Kozhan, R. , Tham, W.W. , 2017. Toxic arbitrage. Rev Financ Stud 
30 (4), 1053–1094 . 
Frazzini, A., Israel, R., Moskowitz, T., 2018. Trading costs. Social Science Re- 
search Network https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract _ id= 
3229719 . 
Glosten, L.R. , Milgrom, P.R. , 1985. Bid, ask, and transaction prices in a spe- 
cialist market with heterogeneously informed traders. J Financ Econ 
14 (1), 71–100 . 
Goettler, R.L. , Parlour, C.A. , Rajan, U. ,2 0 0 5 . Equilibrium in a dynamic limit 
order market. J Finance 60 (5), 2149–2192 . 
Han, J., Khapko, M., Kyle, A.S., 2014. Liquidity with high-frequency mar- 
ket making. Social Science Research Network. https://papers.ssrn.com/ 
sol3/papers.cfm?abstract _ id=2416396 . 
Hasbrouck, J. , Saar, G. , 2013. Low-latency trading. J Financ Markets 16 (4), 
646–679 . 
Hoffmann, P. , 2014. A dynamic limit order market with fast and slow 
traders. J Financ Econ 113 (1), 156–169 . 
Jones, C.M. , 2013. What do we know about high-frequency trading? 
Columbia Business School Research Paper, 13–11 . 
Kyle, A.S. , 1985. Continuous auctions and insider trading. Econometrica: J 
Econometric Soc 53 (6), 1315–1335 . 
Kyle, A.S. , Lee, J. , 2017. Toward a fully continuous exchange. Oxford Rev 
Econ Policy 33 (4), 650–675 . 
Latza, T., Marsh, I.W., Payne, R., 2014. Fast aggressive trading. Social 
Science Research Network. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm? 
abstract _ id=2542184 . 
Li, S., Ye, M., 2021. The Trade-Off Between Discrete Pricing and Discrete 
quantities: Evidence from US-listed ﬁrms. Working paper. University 
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Available at https://papers.ssrn.com/ 
sol3/papers.cfm?abstract _ id=3763516 . 
Li, S., Ye, M., Zheng, M., 2021. Financial Regulation, Clientele Segmen- 
tation, and Stock Exchange Order Types. Working paper. University 
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Available at https://papers.ssrn.com/ 
sol3/papers.cfm?abstract _ id=3763455 . 
Menkveld, A.J. , 2016. The economics of high-frequency trading: taking 
stock. Annu Rev Financ Econ 8, 1–24 . 
Menkveld, A.J. , Zoican, M.A. , 2017. Need for speed? Exchange latency and 
liquidity. Rev Financ Stud 30 (4), 1188–1228 . 
O’Hara, M. , 2015. High-frequency market microstructure. J Financ Econ 
116 (2), 257–270 . 
O’Hara, M. , Saar, G. , Zhong, Z. , 2018. Relative tick size and the trading en- 
vironment. Review Asset Pricing Stud 9 (1), 47–90 . 
Parlour, C.A. , 1998. Price dynamics in limit order markets. Rev Financ Stud 
11 (4), 789–816 . 
Weild, D. , Kim, E. , Newport, L. , 2012. The trouble with small tick sizes: 
larger tick sizes will bring back capital formation, jobs, and investor 
conﬁdence. Capital Markets Series. Grant Thornton, Chicago, IL . 
Yao, C. , Ye, M. , 2018. Why trading speed matters: a tale of queue rationing 
under price controls. Rev Financ Stud 31 (6), 2157–2183 . 
Ye, M., Zheng, M., Li, X., 2020. Price Ceiling, Market Structure, and Payout 
Policies. Working paper. University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
and Guangxi University of Finance and Economics. Available at https: 
//papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract _ id=3727130 . 
980 