

===== PAGE 1 =====

Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 571–589 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Journal of Financial Economics 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec 
Dominant currency debt /p82 
Egemen Eren a , Semyon Malamud b , ∗
a Bank for International Settlements (BIS), Centralbahnplatz 2, Basel CH-4002, Switzerland 
b Swiss Finance Institute EPFL, Extranef 213, UNIL Dorigny, Lausanne 1015, Switzerland 
a r t i c l e i n f o 
Article history: 
Received 10 February 2020 
Revised 5 May 2021 
Accepted 9 May 2021 
Available online 18 July 2021 
JEL classiﬁcation: 
E44 
E52 
F33 
F34 
G15 
G32 
Keywords: 
Dollar debt 
Dominant currency 
Exchange rates 
Inﬂation 
Monetary policy 
a b s t r a c t 
We propose a “debt view” to explain the dominant international role of the dollar. Within 
a simple capital-structure model with debt-currency choice, we show that the “dominant 
currency” is the one that (1) depreciates in global downturns over horizons of typical debt 
maturity and (2) has the steepest nominal yield curve. Empirically, we show the dollar ﬁts 
this description better than other major currencies. The debt view can explain dollar-debt- 
issuance patterns over the past two decades. It also offers insights into the future of the 
dominance of the dollar in the aftermath of the COVID-19 crisis. 
©2 0 2 1 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ) 
/p82 We thank the editor (Ron Kaniel), one anonymous referee, Stefan 
Avdjiev, Claudio Borio, Mike Chernov, Stijn Claessens, Giancarlo Corsetti, 
Husnu Dalgic (discussant), Kent Daniel, Darrell Duﬃe, Linda Goldberg, 
Gita Gopinath, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas (discus- 
sant), Bryan Hardy, Harald Hau, Ben Hebert, Oleg Itskhoki, Zhengyang 
Jiang (discussant), Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Karen 
Lewis, Gordon Liao, Xu Lu, Hanno Lustig (discussant), Matteo Maggiori, 
Emile Marin (discussant), Arnaud Mehl, Erwan Morellec, Dmitry Mukhin 
(discussant), Brent Neiman, Monika Piazzesi, Ricardo Reis, Hélène Rey, 
Lukas Schmid (discussant), Andreas Schrimpf, Amit Seru, Hyun Song Shin, 
Alp Simsek, Jeremy Stein, Michael Weber, and conference and semi- 
nar participants at the AFA, IMF Jacques Polak ARC, NBER IFM, Stanford 
SITE, CEPR ESSIM, IDC Herzliya, Joint BIS-BoE-ECB-IMF Workshop, BIS, U. 
Zurich, EPFL, Uni. Bern, the ECB and USI Lugano for helpful comments. 
Zuzana Filkova and Nicolas Lemercier provided excellent research assis- 
tance. Semyon Malamud acknowledges the ﬁnancial support of the Swiss 
National Science Foundation and the Swiss Finance Institute. Parts of this 
paper were written when Semyon Malamud visited the BIS as a research 
1. Introduction 
The dollar is the most common currency of choice for 
debt contracts worldwide. According to the Bank for In- 
ternational Settlements, the dollar-denominated credit to 
non-banks outside the US amounts to around $12 trillion. 
Whereas the dominance of the dollar had declined be- 
fore 2008, the dollar has strengthened its international role 
since the Global Financial Crisis [ Fig. 1 , ECB (2017) , and 
Maggiori et al. (2019) ]. 
In this paper, we study how a single currency can be- 
come the most common currency of choice for denominat- 
fellow. The views in this article are those of the authors and do not nec- 
essarily represent those of the BIS. All errors are our own. 
∗ Corresponding author. 
E-mail addresses: egemen.eren@bis.org (E. Eren), 
semyon.malamud@epﬂ.ch (S. Malamud). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2021.06.023 
0304-405X/© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ) 

===== PAGE 2 =====

E. Eren and S. Malamud Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 571–589 
Fig. 1. Currency denomination of international debt and cross-border borrowing of non-banks (amounts outstanding). Source: Bank for International Set- 
tlements . 
ing debt contracts, that is the dominant currency , why that 
choice is the dollar, and why the dominance of the dollar 
may have declined and recovered in the last two decades. 
To ﬁx ideas, in this paper, our focus is not on answering 
why emerging-market ﬁrms issue debt in dollars as op- 
posed to local currency. Instead, our primary focus is on 
why large, global ﬁrms issue debt in dollars as opposed to 
other major safe-haven currencies, such as the euro or the 
yen. 
According to the conventional view, debt issuance in 
dollars is investor-driven. Investors prefer holding safe as- 
sets that tend to appreciate in bad times. Therefore, ﬁrms 
choose the currency denomination of their debt to cater 
to investors’ demand. This view faces three potential chal- 
lenges. First, we show empirically that the dollar is not 
the “safest” among the major currencies, such as the euro, 
the Japanese yen, or the Swiss franc, especially over longer 
horizons. Second, nominal interest rates in dollars are 
higher than those in these other major currencies. Third, 
the dollar increased its international role after the Bretton 
Woods, even as it depreciated considerably against other 
major currencies in the 1970s ( Gourinchas, 2019 ). 
We propose the debt view, in which debt issuance 
in dollars is borrower-driven. In the baseline version of 
our model, ﬁrms ﬁnance themselves by issuing equity 
and nominal, defaultable debt to optimize the trade-off
between tax beneﬁts of debt and the risk of default. 2 
Debt can potentially be issued in any currency. Firms 
issue in dollars if dollar debt maximizes this trade-off. 
Our ﬁrst theoretical result is that, independent of the in- 
vestors’ preferences, ﬁrms always issue debt in the most 
2 We think of our model as being best applicable to large interna- 
tional ﬁrms deciding whether to issue debt in one of the major inter- 
national currencies with comparable market liquidity and issuance costs. 
Nikolov et al. (2018) show that the trade-off theory eﬃciently explains 
capital structure dynamics for large ﬁrms. By contrast, other theories need 
to be developed for smaller ﬁrms facing a high degree of informational 
asymmetry. 
“CAPM-risky” currency. It is the currency that, controlling 
for issuance costs, has the highest covariance with the 
stock market over the horizons of debt maturity . We call 
it the “dominant” currency. If investors’ marginal utility 
co-moves negatively with the stock market, such debt is 
unattractive for debt-holders, and yet ﬁrms still prefer is- 
suing in this currency. 
These features of the debt view have two implications 
and can explain the challenges to the conventional view 
outlined above. First, while the dollar does tend to appre- 
ciate in economic downturns in the short run, 3 dollar debt 
represents a better hedge for ﬁrms against long-term eco- 
nomic downturns than other major currencies, such as the 
euro, the yen, or the Swiss franc, making repayment eas- 
ier in times of distress (in expectation, over the long run). 
Second, the currency in which ﬁrms prefer to issue debt 
should have a higher risk premium over the long run. As a 
result, the dollar is the dominant currency for denominat- 
ing debt, not despite being the riskiest of the major curren- 
cies (over the horizon of typical debt maturity), but pre- 
cisely because of it. A higher associated risk premium leads 
to higher nominal dollar interest rates. Finally, we show 
that since the end of Bretton Woods, stock market declines 
tended to be followed by the depreciation of the dollar at 
horizons beyond one year, incentivizing ﬁrms to borrow in 
dollars, thus cementing its dominant international role. 
Empirically, we test our prediction that the dollar is 
the “CAPM riskiest” among the major international curren- 
cies. The ﬁrst prediction of our model is that the dominant 
role of the dollar in international debt markets might be 
attributed to market participants’ expectations of a posi- 
tive co-movement of the dollar with the stock market over 
the horizons of debt maturity of ﬁrms , which is typically 
around ﬁve years (see Section 5 ). We show this empirically 
in two ways. First, we use asset-price-implied forward- 
looking expectations of market participants regarding the 
3 In particular, over horizons below one year, the dollar is less risky 
than many other major currencies. 
572 

===== PAGE 3 =====

E. Eren and S. Malamud Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 571–589 
covariance of the EUR/USD exchange rate and the S&P 500, 
directly computed from so-called quanto contracts. Second, 
we compute the historical covariances between the dollar 
and global stock markets. 
A direct way to compute the forward-looking covari- 
ance between the stock market and exchange rates is to 
use so-called quanto forward contracts ( Kremens and Mar- 
tin, 2019 ). A euro-quanto forward contract for S&P 500, 
for example, pays off the level of the S&P 500 index in 
euros when the contract matures. As opposed to a con- 
tract that pays off the S&P 500 in dollars, the value of 
this contract depends on the anticipated covariance be- 
tween the index and the EUR/USD exchange rate. Hence, 
the price of this contract reﬂects the expectations of in- 
vestors about currency returns and currency risk premia. 
Kremens and Martin (2019) compute the quanto-implied 
covariance for contracts with a two-year maturity and ﬁnd 
the quanto-implied covariance of the EUR/USD exchange 
rate with S&P500 exhibited a robust downward trend in 
the post-crisis period and has become negative in the re- 
cent years. A negative quanto-implied risk premium (QRP) 
means market participants believe the euro will appreciate 
against the dollar when the S&P 500 falls, in line with our 
theory for why ﬁrms would issue debt in dollars. 
Our theoretical characterization of the dominant cur- 
rency also has direct implications for the time-series dy- 
namics of the shares of the dollar- and euro-denominated 
debt. Namely, keeping the distribution of issuance costs 
constant across ﬁrms, our model predicts the share 
of dollar-denominated debt relative to that of euro- 
denominated debt is negatively related to the QRP. Con- 
sistent with the predictions of our model, we ﬁnd a strong 
negative relationship between quanto-implied covariances 
and the share of dollar debt, suggesting forward-looking 
expectations of currency returns are an important driver 
of ﬁrms’ debt-currency-denomination choice. Moreover, we 
interpret this fact as strong evidence of a distinctive pre- 
diction of our theory; that is, changes to the currency com- 
position of debt can occur at high frequency and are re- 
lated to forward-looking expectations because our regres- 
sions are at a quarterly frequency. 
The debt view also assigns an important role for mon- 
etary policy if relative inﬂation between two countries is 
an important driver of exchange rates. 4 Similar to the pre- 
dictions regarding the QRP, our model implies the share 
of dollar-denominated debt relative to euro-denominated 
debt is positively related to the inﬂation risk premium 
of the dollar and negatively related to that of the euro. 
Therefore, according to our model, central bank inﬂation- 
stabilization policies in global downturns and ﬁrms’ debt- 
currency choice are closely linked. Strikingly, we ﬁnd debt- 
currency shares move more tightly with the expectations 
about inﬂation risk premia, especially in the eurozone, 
which explains debt-issuance patterns over the last two 
decades, suggesting deﬂation risk in the eurozone after the 
4 See, for example, Imbs et al. (2005) and Chowdhry et al. (2005) for 
evidence supporting the relative PPP, as well as Chernov and Creal (0 0 0 0) , 
who argue PPP is an important driver of long-horizon currency risk pre- 
mia. 
crisis is a possible reason why the euro lost its momen- 
tum. 5 
Computing covariances from historical data, we ﬁnd the 
dollar co-moves positively with the stock market at hori- 
zons that typically accord with the debt maturity of ﬁrms. 
This pattern does not contradict the well-documented ten- 
dency of the dollar to appreciate in bad times over shorter 
horizons ( Gourinchas et al., 2017 ). Indeed, we ﬁnd the dol- 
lar co-moves negatively with the stock market for horizons 
up to a year, making it less risky over the short-run than 
other major currencies. However, the sign of the covariance 
switches for longer horizons corresponding to typical ma- 
turities of debt that ﬁrms issue. 
To gain a deeper understanding of the term structure 
of dollar-stock market co-movement, we further decom- 
pose the long-horizon covariances into shorter-term con- 
temporaneous and lead-lag relationships between the dol- 
lar and the stock market, proxied by S&P 500 or the MSCI 
World Index. Whereas the contemporaneous covariance is 
negative, we ﬁnd the stock market positively predicts the 
dollar, and the strength of this effect is suﬃcient to pro- 
duce a sign change at longer horizons. To formally estimate 
the lead-lag relationships between the dollar and the stock 
market, we estimate a VAR for their joint-return process 
and study the impulse response for their joint dynamics 
after a stock-market-depreciation shock. We ﬁnd that after 
such a shock, the dollar signiﬁcantly depreciates in future 
periods, consistent with our theory. 
As the dollar co-movement with the stock market 
increases over longer horizons, our model predicts the 
propensity to issue dollar-denominated debt increases with 
debt maturity. We use granular bond-issuance data to test 
this prediction, and ﬁnd strong support for it. 
The sign change in the term structure of the dollar- 
stock market covariance (negative for short horizons, posi- 
tive for long horizons) naturally raises the question of what 
would happen if the ﬁrm could rebalance its capital struc- 
ture after a short-run dollar appreciation. To answer this 
question, we solve a dynamic version of our model with 
an intermediate period at which the ﬁrm can issue more 
debt or buy back debt in any currency. Our ﬁrst result is 
that independent of the underlying shock dynamics, the 
ﬁrm never buys back debt, because doing so would mean 
foregoing the tax beneﬁts. This result is a version of the 
leverage ratchet effect of Admati et al. (2018) . Thus, when 
the ﬁrm issues long-term debt at time t = 0 , it anticipates 
holding this debt all the way until expiry, making this 
part of the debt-choice problem effectively static. The next 
question is whether the possibility of issuing more debt 
at the intermediate period alters the currency composi- 
tion of debt ex ante. Despite the extreme complexity of the 
dynamic capital-structure problem, we derive the optimal 
debt-issuance policy in closed form and uncover a novel 
inter-temporal trade-off mechanism . According to this mech- 
anism, the ﬁrm chooses between receiving the tax beneﬁts 
today and paying the (effective) cost of default tomorrow. 
5 The importance of accommodative monetary policy in helping reduce 
real debt burdens of ﬁrms and the differences across central banks in ac- 
complishing this goal is also acknowledged by the European Central Bank 
(ECB). See, for example, Praet (2016) and Cœuré (2019) . 
573 

===== PAGE 4 =====

E. Eren and S. Malamud Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 571–589 
We characterize this novel trade-off explicitly in terms 
of the slopes of nominal yield curves across currencies and 
show the ﬁrm always selects the currency with the steep- 
est yield curve. The dollar also ﬁts this description better 
than other major currencies. In addition, we test a pre- 
diction of our model that the fraction of dollar-debt is- 
suance co-moves positively with the difference in yield- 
curve slopes between the dollar and the euro (using the 
government bond yield curves in the US and Germany). 
Consistent with our theory, we ﬁnd that, quite remarkably, 
regressing dollar-debt issuance on this yield-curve slope 
differential produces statistically signiﬁcant estimates with 
the predicted sign. 
Finally, the COVID-19 crisis and ensuing developments 
in exchange-rate markets shed further light on our theory. 
Our theory suggests borrowers would prefer to issue debt 
in dollars if they expect it to depreciate in response to a 
global shock against other major currencies, in part due to 
easing by monetary policy. Following the COVID-19 shock, 
the Federal Reserve promptly and forcefully eased mone- 
tary policy and rolled out crisis programs. As a result, the 
dollar depreciated against all major international curren- 
cies. Unlike previous episodes, this depreciation happened 
almost immediately and to the order of around 10% in a 
few months. The depreciation of the dollar provided a ma- 
terial hedge for ﬁrms with nominal dollar debt as opposed 
to debt in euros, yen, or the Swiss francs. Moreover, in- 
ﬂation risk premia for the dollar increased compared with 
the euro. In this context, our theory predicts higher dollar- 
debt issuance in the post-COVID period. 
We show evidence using granular issuance data that 
ﬁrms tended to issue more dollar debt than other major 
currencies in the aftermath of the COVID-19 crisis, con- 
trolling for other factors and ﬁrm ﬁxed effects. The na- 
ture of the shock, the depreciation of the dollar, the impact 
of monetary policy, and the debt-issuance patterns in the 
aftermath of the COVID-19 crisis are all in line with the 
mechanisms discussed in our paper. 
Related literature. 
Recent literature pays considerable attention to the in- 
ternational role of the dollar. The dollar is omnipresent 
in all parts of the global ﬁnancial system ( CGFS, 2020; 
Gopinath and Stein, 0 0 0 0; Gourinchas et al., 2019 ), includ- 
ing international trade invoicing ( Goldberg and Tille, 2008; 
Gopinath, 2015; Casas et al., 2017 ), global banking ( Shin, 
2012; Ivashina et al., 2015; Aldasoro et al., 2019 ), corporate 
borrowing ( Bruno et al., 2018; Bruno and Shin, 2017; Gio- 
vanni et al., 2017 ), central bank reserve holdings ( Bocola 
and Lorenzoni, 2020; Ilzetzki et al., 2019 ), and global port- 
folios ( Maggiori et al., 2019 ). Our paper adds to the grow- 
ing literature that studies the international role of the 
dollar. 6 
Our main contribution is the introduction of the “debt 
view” in explaining the international role of the dollar. Cur- 
rent explanations can be broadly classiﬁed into three cat- 
6 See also, for example, Matsuyama et al. (1993) , Rey (2001) , 
Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2002) , Caballero et al. (2008) , 
Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2009) , Devereux and Shi (2013) , 
Chahrour and Valchev (2017) , Mukhin (2018) , Farhi and Maggiori (2018) , 
He et al. (2019) , Drenik et al. (2019) and Bahaj and Reis (2020a) . 
egories. First is the “trade view,” wherein trade invoicing 
in dollars explains the dollar’s role in the global econ- 
omy ( Gopinath and Stein, 0 0 0 0 ). Second is the “safe as- 
set view,” in which the dollar is dominant because of its 
safe-haven properties ( He et al., 2019; Farhi and Maggiori, 
2018; Jiang et al., 2018 ) and the global demand for safe 
assets ( Caballero et al., 2008; 2015; 2017 ). Third is the “ve- 
hicle currency view,” wherein the dominance of the dol- 
lar arises from its international use as a vehicle currency 
( Goldberg and Tille, 2008 ). 
The debt view of the dollar’s dominance assigns an im- 
portant role in the choice of the debt-currency denomina- 
tion of ﬁrms, driven by forward-looking expectations about 
exchange rates and monetary policy . The main mechanism 
in our model is similar to the one in Gomes et al. (2016) ; 
but, in an international setting. The debt view focuses on 
the medium run to account for typical debt maturity of 
ﬁrms, and as such, complements other theories that focus 
on the short-run frictions such as price stickiness, or the 
short-run appreciation of the dollar in bad times as insur- 
ance to investors. In contrast to other theories, we show 
a dominant currency equilibrium in the debt market can 
arise without relying on network effects, price stickiness, 
pricing complementarities, and safety demand. 
Three closely related papers to ours are by 
Gopinath and Stein (0 0 0 0) , Jiang et al. (0 0 0 0) , 
Liao (2020) , and Bahaj and Reis (2020b) . Gopinath and 
Stein (0 0 0 0) demonstrate how the dollar can emerge as a 
key international currency starting from its role in trade 
invoicing and in turn affecting global banking, which in 
turn affects the currency denomination of bank deposits 
and ﬁrm borrowing endogenously. Whereas their main 
focus is emerging markets and bank-intermediated debt, 
our results apply mostly for the currency choice of large, 
global ﬁrms and also apply to market-based ﬁnancing, and 
the dollar’s dominant role arises due to its risk properties. 
Jiang et al. (0 0 0 0) ﬁnd that investors attach a convenience 
yield for dollar safe assets that can be observed from 
covered interested parity deviations. An implication of 
their results is that ﬁrms would issue dollar debt to reap 
the beneﬁts of this convenience yield. Liao (2020) shows 
ﬁrms’ issuance ﬂows or euro and dollar debt between 
the eurozone and the US respond to covered interest 
parity deviations. Bahaj and Reis (2020b) also assign an 
important role for monetary policy for the international- 
ization of currencies as in our paper, studying the Chinese 
renminbi’s jumpstart as an international currency. Our 
results complement the ﬁndings of these papers. We ﬁnd 
ﬁrms choose the dollar as opposed to other currencies, 
regardless of the preferences of investors, and the issuance 
of dollar debt could be determined by its favorable risk 
properties over longer-horizons compared with other ma- 
jor currencies, such as the euro, the Japanese yen, or the 
Swiss franc. As we explain above, short-term safe-haven 
properties of the dollar do not contradict this ﬁnding. 
A growing literature studies reasons for persistent un- 
covered interest rate parity (UIP) violations and its impli- 
cations of these violations for the choice between local- 
and foreign-currency borrowing of emerging-market ﬁrms 
( Baskaya et al., 2017; Salomao and Varela, 2020 ). Our pri- 
mary interest lies in understanding why the dollar is the 
574 

===== PAGE 5 =====

E. Eren and S. Malamud Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 571–589 
“dominant foreign currency” as opposed to similar curren- 
cies with similarly deep and liquid markets, such as the 
euro. Thus, we abstract from many features of currencies 
that lead to UIP deviations, in reality, to highlight our main 
mechanism, even though capturing these deviations in re- 
duced form through differential issuance costs would be 
possible. In the Internet Appendix, we provide some the- 
oretical and empirical results for the dominant and local 
currency mix in the debt of a cross-section of emerging- 
market ﬁrms that depend on the properties of local inﬂa- 
tion and its relation to the US inﬂation. 
Our paper is also related to the extensive literature on 
long-term nominal debt and its real effects, including debt 
deﬂation ( Fisher, 1933 ), debt overhang ( Myers, 1977 ), and 
leverage dynamics ( Gomes et al., 2016 ). 
2. Theory 
In this section, we build a simple model that lays out 
conditions for the currency choice of ﬁrms’ debt issuance. 
Our main theoretical result is that ﬁrms’ currency choice 
comes down to a simple statistic: the covariance between 
stock returns and exchange-rate returns. This covariance 
governs the choice of debt currency, regardless of the 
stochastic discount factor of lenders. In the ﬁrst part, we 
take exchange rates as given. In the second part, we add 
slightly more structure to exchange-rate determination, al- 
lowing us to assign a role for inﬂation and monetary policy 
in determining ﬁrms’ currency choice. Although we take a 
partial-equilibrium approach in this paper for simplicity, in 
an earlier working-paper version, we solved the model in 
general equilibrium ( Eren and Malamud, 2019 ). All results 
and intuitions go through in a general-equilibrium setting 
as well. 
2.1. Model 
Time is discrete, indexed by t = 0 , 1 , ··· . A large, in- 
ternational ﬁrm is inﬁnitely lived and generates after-tax 
cash ﬂows of /Omega1t Z t , where /Omega1t is the common productiv- 
ity shock, which is measured in dollars, and Z t is an id- 
iosyncratic shock. If the ﬁrm generates cash ﬂows in dif- 
ferent currencies, we just multiply them with the respec- 
tive exchange rates and then aggregate them to get the 
total dollar cash ﬂows. We assume Z t follows a geomet- 
ric random walk, Z t+1 = Y t+1 Z t , where Y t are i.i.d. and 
have a density P (Y t+1 = y ) = ℓy ℓ −1 , y ∈ [0 , 1] and ℓ > 0 . 
This assumption is common in the literature on interna- 
tional trade ( Melitz, 2003 ) and is made for tractability. We 
denote by /Phi1(y ) ≡ P (Y ≤ y ) = y ℓ the cumulative distri- 
bution function of idiosyncratic shocks. All cash ﬂows are 
priced with a common, exogenously given dollar stochastic 
discount factor M t ,t +1 = M $ 
t ,t +1 . The choice of the dollar as 
the reference currency is made purely for tractability. See 
Lemma A.2 in the Internet Appendix, where we re-derive 
all expressions in the domestic currency. 
Firms ﬁnance themselves by issuing both equity and 
defaultable nominal bonds in any of the N currencies, ma- 
turing in one time period. 7 Each bond has a nominal face 
value of one currency unit, and the ﬁrm is required to 
pay a coupon of c currency units per unit of outstanding 
debt. 8 We denote by B j,t the stock of outstanding nomi- 
nal debt at time t denominated in the currency of coun- 
try j. We also denote by B t = (B j,t ) N 
j=1 the vector of debt 
stocks in different currencies That is, B j,t is the face value 
of debt in currency jt o be paid back at time t + 1 . As in 
Gomes et al. (2016) , we assume that coupon payments are 
shielded from taxes so that 
B t+1 (B t ) = ((1 − τ) c + 1) 
N ∑  
j=1 
E j,t+1 B j,t (1) 
is the total debt-servicing cost, net of tax shields. There- 
fore, the choice of ﬁrm leverage depends on the trade-off
between tax advantages and distress costs. 9 Thus, absent 
default, the nominal distribution to shareholders at time 
t + 1 is given by 
/Omega1t+1 Z t+1 − B t+1 (B t ) = Z t /Omega1t+1 Y t+1 . 
If the idiosyncratic shock realization, Y t+1 = Z t+1 /Z t , is be- 
low an endogenous default threshold /Psi1t+1 (B t ) , sharehold- 
ers optimally default on their debt. Upon default, share- 
holders get zero, and debtholders take over the ﬁrm and 
are able to recover a fraction ρ < 1 of debt face value and 
coupon. 
Thus, the dollar value of cash ﬂows to debthold- 
ers of currency- j debt are given by (1 + c)( 1 Y t+1 ≥/Psi1t+1 + 
ρ 1 Y t+1 < /Psi1t+1 ) E j,t+1 . Hence, by direct calculation, using the 
fact that the idiosyncratic shocks Y t+1 are independent of 
/Omega1t+1 , M t ,t +1 , E j,t+1 , we get that the dollar price of one 
unit of debt denominated in currency j is given by 
δj (B t ) = E t [ M t ,t +1 (1 Y t+1 ≥/Psi1t+1 
+ ρ 1 Y t+1 < /Psi1t+1 )(1 + c) E j,t+1 ] 
= E t 
[
M t ,t +1 ( 1 −(1 −ρ)/Phi1(/Psi1t+1 (B t )) ) (1 + c) E j,t+1 
]
, 
(2) 
where /Phi1(/Psi1t+1 (B t )) is the default probability conditional 
on the realization of aggregate variables. 10 We assume that 
7 We interpret this one single period as the typical maturity of debt 
of the order of several years. See, for example, Cortina et al. (2018) . The 
dollar is known to have a tendency to appreciate over the short term dur- 
ing crises ( Maggiori, 2017; Farhi and Maggiori, 2018 ). So, some portion of 
the long-term debt may become due exactly during a crisis. We abstract 
from such considerations. Nonetheless, ﬁrms may keep dollar cash buffers 
to mitigate potential problems from the dollar’s short-term risk proﬁle. 
8 Apart from the multiple-currencies assumption, when modeling the 
ﬁnancing side, we closely follow Gomes et al. (2016) . However, our model 
is static. Empirical ﬁndings in Kalemli-Ozcan et al. (2018) suggest the ef- 
fects of foreign-currency debt on ﬁrms’ behavior might be even stronger 
in a dynamic setting. 
9 For simplicity, as in Gomes et al. (2016) , we assume that tax shields 
are the only motivation for issuing debt. However, one can also interpret 
τ as a reduced form of gains from debt issuance, such as the alleviation 
of adverse-selection costs. 
10 Let X t+1 = (/Omega1t+1 , M t ,t +1 , E j,t+1 ) . Then, by the law of iterated expec- 
tations, 
E t [ M t ,t +1 (1 Y t+1 ≥/Psi1t+1 + ρ 1 Y t+1 < /Psi1t+1 )(1 + c) E j,t+1 ] 
= E t [ M t ,t +1 (1 − 1 Y t+1 ≤/Psi1t+1 + ρ 1 Y t+1 < /Psi1t+1 )(1 + c) E j,t+1 ] 
= E t [ M t ,t +1 (1 − (1 − ρ) E[ 1 Y t+1 ≤/Psi1t+1 | X t+1 ])(1 + c) E j,t+1 ] 
575 

===== PAGE 6 =====

E. Eren and S. Malamud Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 571–589 
ﬁrms face a proportional cost q (j) of issuing in country j
currency for j = 1 , ··· , N and maximize equity value plus 
the proceeds from the debt issuance net of issuance costs. 
Although we do not micro-found these costs, doing so is 
not diﬃcult. These costs may originate from underwrit- 
ing costs, the limited risk bearing capacity of intermedi- 
aries (in the case of bank loans), or the actual debt place- 
ment costs incurred by the investment banks (e.g., locat- 
ing bond investors). The observed convenience yields for 
dollar-denominated debt ( Jiang et al., 0 0 0 0 ) can be viewed 
as a negative issuance cost q ($) in our model. 
Conditional on no default, the equity value V t of a given 
ﬁrm after the previous period debt had been repaid satisﬁes 
V t = /Omega1t Z t + max 
B t 
{ N ∑  
j=1 
δj (B t ) B j,t (1 −q (j)) 
+ E t [ M t ,t +1 max { V t+1 − B t+1 (B t ) , 0 } ] 
}
. 
It is then straightforward to show equity value is homo- 
geneous in Z t , so that V t = Z t ¯/Omega1t for some variable ¯/Omega1t that 
is independent of idiosyncratic shocks. Thus, default occurs 
whenever Y t+1 falls below the default threshold 
/Psi1t+1 (B t ) ≡ B t+1 (B t ) 
¯/Omega1t+1 
, (4) 
Note that, importantly, /Psi1t+1 is invariant to currency choice , 
because both the numerator B t+1 (B t ) and the denom- 
inator ¯/Omega1t+1 are denominated in dollars. In particular, 
the currency- k price of debt denominated in currency j
satisﬁes δj (B t , k ) = E t [ M k 
t ,t +1 ( 1 − (1 − ρ)/Phi1(/Psi1t+1 (B t )) ) (1 + 
c) E j,t+1 / E k,t+1 ] where M k 
t ,t +1 = M $ 
t ,t +1 E k,t ,t +1 is the pricing 
kernel in currency k . 
Everywhere in the sequel, we use E $ 
t and Cov $ 
t to de- 
note conditional expectation and covariance under the 
dollar risk-neutral measure with the conditional density 
E t [ M t ,t +1 ] −1 M t ,t +1 . Furthermore, for each stochastic pro- 
cess X t , we consistently use the notation 
X t ,t +1 ≡ X t+1 
X t 
. 
We need the following assumption to ensure that the 
leverage-choice problem has a non-trivial solution. 
Assumption 1 . The (exogenously speciﬁed) issuance costs 
q (j) , j = 1 , ··· , N satisfy 
(1 −q (j))(1 + c) > (1 + c(1 − τ)) and 
¯q (j, $) ≡ ((1 −q (j))(1 + c) − (1 + c(1 − τ))) 
( 1 − ρ)(1 + c)[(1 −q (j)) + ℓ (1 −q ($))] − (1 + c(1 − τ)) 
> 0 
(5) 
for all j = 1 , ··· , N. We also deﬁne ¯q ($) ≡ ¯q ($ , $) . 
The ﬁrst condition ensures the cost q (j) of issuing debt 
is less than the gains, as measured by the value of tax 
shields, so debt issuance is positive. The second condi- 
tion ensures that the recovery rate ρ is suﬃciently low; 
= E t 
[
M t ,t +1 ( 1 − (1 − ρ)/Phi1(/Psi1t+1 (B t )) ) (1 + c) E j,t+1 
] (3) 
otherwise, funding becomes so cheap for the ﬁrm that the 
ﬁrm may want to issue inﬁnite amounts of debt. The fol- 
lowing is true. 11 
Theorem 2.1 . Issuing debt only in dollars is optimal if and 
only if 
¯q (j, $) 
¯q ($) 
−1 ≤
Cov $ 
t 
(¯/Omega1−ℓ 
t+1 , E j,t ,t +1 
)
E $ 
t 
[¯/Omega1−ℓ 
t+1 
]
E $ 
t [ E j,t ,t +1 ] 
(6) 
for all j = 1 , ··· , N . In this case, optimal dollar debt satisﬁes 
B $ ,t = (1 + c(1 − τ)) −1 
(
¯q ($) 
E $ 
t [ ¯/Omega1−ℓ 
t+1 ] 
)ℓ −1 
. (7) 
Absent heterogeneity in issuance costs (i.e., when q (j) 
is independent of j), (6) takes the form of 
Cov $ 
t 
(¯/Omega1−ℓ 
t+1 , E j,t ,t +1 
)
≥ 0 j = 1 , ··· , N . (8) 
Intuitively, at time t, ﬁrms, when deciding on the cur- 
rency composition of their debt, choose to issue in dol- 
lars if they expect the dollar to depreciate when their 
time t + 1 valuation is low; condition (8) provides a pre- 
cise formalization of this intuition. Because 
(¯/Omega1t+1 
)−ℓ 
at- 
tains its largest value when ¯/Omega1t+1 is close to zero, covari- 
ance (8) overweights the distress states: when ℓ is suﬃ- 
ciently high, (8) essentially requires the dollar to depreci- 
ate against all its key competitors during times of major 
economic downturns. 
Also note condition (8) corresponds to the problem a 
ﬁrm faces when choosing between dollar debt and debt 
denominated in other key currencies, such as, for exam- 
ple the euro, the yen, the Swiss franc, and the pound. For 
an emerging-market ﬁrm that is choosing between local- 
currency debt and dollar debt, heterogeneity in issuance 
costs may be as (if not more so) important as the cur- 
rency risk proﬁle. However, even for the choice between 
dollar- and euro-denominated debt, ignoring differences in 
issuance costs puts the dollar at a disadvantage: Existing 
evidence ( Velandia and Cabral, 2017 ) suggests issuing debt 
in dollars is signiﬁcantly cheaper than issuing in euros. 
The convenience yield on the dollar also effectively implies 
negative issuance costs for dollar-denominated debt ( Jiang 
et al., 0 0 0 0; Liao, 2020 ). 
To test the validity of condition 6 , we need to ﬁnd an 
empirical proxy for ¯/Omega1t . We suppose for simplicity that the 
distressed state only lasts for one period, and debt holders 
11 As we show in the Internet Appendix (see Proposition A.1), in our 
model, ﬁrms never hedge their foreign-exchange risk. Ample evidence 
shows ﬁrms often choose not to hedge their foreign-currency risk. See, 
for example, Bodnár (2006) , who shows only 4% of Hungarian ﬁrms with 
foreign-currency debt hedge their currency risk exposure. Furthermore, 
according to Salomao and Varela (2020) , “data from the Central Bank of 
Peru reveals that only 6% of ﬁrms borrowing in foreign currency em- 
ploy ﬁnancial instruments to hedge the exchange rate risk, and a simi- 
lar number is found in Brazil.” Du and Schreger (2017) also provide ev- 
idence that ﬁrms do not fully hedge their currency risk exposures. See 
also Niepmann and Schmidt-Eisenlohr (2019) and Bruno and Shin (2017) . 
That being said, Liao (2020) does ﬁnd evidence that at least 40% of global 
ﬁrms issue currency-hedged foreign debt. Although costly external ﬁnanc- 
ing is known to make hedging optimal ( Froot et al., 1993; Hugonnier 
et al., 2015 ), Rampini et al. (2014) show both theoretically and empiri- 
cally that, in fact, more ﬁnancially constrained ﬁrms hedge less. For more 
on hedging, see Section 3.4 . 
576 

===== PAGE 7 =====

E. Eren and S. Malamud Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 571–589 
run the ﬁrm ineﬃciently, making its output drop. We call 
this drop “Distress Costs.” The following is true. 
Proposition 1 . Let S t be the (value-weighted) stock market in- 
dex (i.e., total market capitalization of all (large and diversi- 
ﬁed) ﬁrms. Then, 
S t = ¯/Omega1t − Distress Costs t . 
Proposition 1 shows that ¯/Omega1t is closely related to the 
market portfolio. If distress costs are small relative to the 
total value of the stock index, then ¯/Omega1t can be directly prox- 
ied by the corresponding stock market index of “similar”
ﬁrms. We therefore use stock market index returns in our 
empirical tests of condition (8) . 
2.2. Roles for inﬂation and monetary policy 
In this section, we derive a link between the character- 
ization in Theorem 2.1 and the inﬂation risk premium and 
assign a role for monetary policy in determining the dom- 
inant currency in debt issuance. 
Denote by P i,t inﬂation in country i, i = 1 , ··· , N. We 
make the following assumptions about the joint long-term 
dynamics of inﬂation and exchange rates at horizons of av- 
erage debt maturity. 
Assumption 2 . A global business-cycle shock, a t , exists such 
that 
• Relative PPP is an important driver of exchange rates: 
E j,t ,t +1 = P $ ,t ,t +1 P −1 
j,t ,t +1 e ε ∗
j,t+1 
where ε ∗
j,t+1 ∼ N(0 , σ2 
i, ∗) are the log real exchange rates. 
• Stochastic discount factor is countercyclical, 
log M t ,t +1 = −γa t+1 + ε M 
t+1 , 
where ε M 
i,t+1 ∼ N(0 , σ2 
M ) . 
• Stock prices are cyclical 
log S i,t ,t +1 = βi a t + ε S 
i,t , 
where ε S 
i,t ∼ N(0 , σ2 
S ) and βi > 0 . 
• All variables a t , ε M 
i,t , ε ∗
j,t , ε i,t , ε S 
t are independent. 
Under Assumption 2 , a key driver of debt-currency 
choice will be forward-looking expectations about the co- 
movement of inﬂation with the stock market. The latter 
can be backed out from the inﬂation risk premium, given 
by the difference between inﬂation expectations under the 
risk-neutral and the physical measures: 
IRP i,t = log 
(
E i 
t [ P i,t ,t +1 ] 
E t [ P i,t ,t +1 ] 
)
= log 
(
e r t Cov t (M i,t ,t +1 , P i,t ,t +1 ) 
E t [ P i,t ,t +1 ] 
)
. (9) 
The following is true. 
Theorem 2.2 . Under Assumption 2 , ﬁrms issue all debt in US 
dollars if and only if the US has the highest inﬂation risk pre- 
mium. 
Although Assumption 2 ’s requirements to derive 
Theorem 2.2 is restrictive, they allow us to highlight 
the important link between our results and Fisherian 
debt-deﬂation theory ( Fisher, 1933 ). The common-shock 
structure in Assumption 2 allows us to abstract from 
the choice between local-currency and foreign-currency 
debt, and focus on the choice between different global 
currencies (e.g., the euro and the dollar). 
3. Evidence from forward-looking measures 
The ﬁrst goal of this section is to check whether the risk 
properties of the dollar ﬁt the predictions of our theory of 
the dominant currency using forward-looking measures of 
the covariance between the stock market returns and ex- 
change rates. The second goal is to understand the pre- 
and post-crisis trends in the shares of euro- and dollar- 
denominated debt through the lens of our model. 
An ideal test of our predictions would be to test the 
following condition: 
¯q (j, $) 
¯q ($) 
−1 ≤
Cov $ 
t 
((¯/Omega1t+1 
)−ℓ 
, E j,t ,t +1 
)
E $ 
t 
[( ¯/Omega1t+1 ) −ℓ 
]
E $ 
t [ E j,t ,t +1 ] 
. (10) 
According to our model, abstracting from differences in 
issuance costs, the currency that market participants expect 
to co-move more with the stock market would be the cur- 
rency ﬁrms would choose to denominate their debt. We 
show, using forward-looking risk premia recovered from 
asset prices, that the dollar ﬁts this description. 
Moreover, if the distribution of issuance costs stays 
roughly constant across ﬁrms, our model implies a tight 
link between the time variation in this anticipated co- 
movement and the currency denomination of debt is- 
suance. In particular, all else constant, our model would at- 
tribute the recent rise in the share of dollar-denominated 
debt to heightened expectations of market participants of 
the dollar becoming more positively (or less negatively) 
correlated with the stock market than the euro over longer 
horizons. By extension, the dollar becomes more of a 
hedge for long-term borrowers rather than investors. We 
provide evidence for the link between debt-issuance pat- 
terns and such forward-looking market expectations and 
ﬁnd support for the debt view, suggesting ﬁrms issue more 
dollar debt when the dollar becomes riskier from the in- 
vestors’ point of view. 
3.1. Quanto-implied risk premia and inﬂation risk premia 
A direct way to compute the forward-looking covari- 
ance between the stock market and exchange rates is to 
use so-called quanto forward contracts ( Kremens and Mar- 
tin, 2019 ), which provides an almost ideal test of our the- 
ory. A euro-quanto forward contract for S&P 500 with ma- 
turity T , for example, pays off the level of the S&P 500 in- 
dex in euros . Therefore, at initiation, the exchange rate is 
ﬁxed. As opposed to a contract that pays off the S&P 500 
in dollars, the value of this contract depends on the an- 
ticipated covariance between the index and the EUR/USD 
exchange rate. 
Hence, the price of this contract reﬂects the expecta- 
tions of investors about currency returns. For example, if a 
quanto contract on the S&P 500 denominated in euros is 
577 

===== PAGE 8 =====

E. Eren and S. Malamud Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 571–589 
Fig. 2. Two-year quanto-implied risk premia and two- and ﬁve- year inﬂation risk premia in the US and eurozone. Source: QRP data are from Kremens and 
Martin (2019) and IRP data are from Hördahl and Tristani (2014) . 
more valuable than the S&P 500 denominated in dollars, 
the implication is that investors expect the euro to depre- 
ciate when the index (in dollars) is low, and vice versa. 
Formally, we deﬁne the quanto-implied risk premium 
(QRP) as: 
QRP t = Cov $ 
t 
(
S t+1 , 
EUR 
USD 
)
= 
R $ 
f,t 
R i 
f,t P t 
(Q t −F t ) , (11) 
where Q t and F t are quanto and vanilla forward prices, re- 
spectively. 
Using the approximation 
Cov $ 
t 
(
S −ℓ 
t+1 , 
EUR 
USD 
)
≈− ℓ Cov $ 
t 
(
S t+1 , 
EUR 
USD 
)
, 
we can transform the QRP measure into the covariance we 
derived in the previous section. Namely, a negative QRP 
means investors expect the dollar to depreciate against the 
euro when the S&P 500 falls. 
Kremens and Martin (2019) compute the quanto- 
implied covariance for contracts with a two-year maturity 
and ﬁnd the quanto-implied covariance of the EUR/USD ex- 
change rate with S&P 500 exhibited a very strong down- 
ward trend in the post-crisis period and has become neg- 
ative in the recent years ( Fig. 2 ). This evidence is perfectly 
in line with the predictions of the debt view. 
Whereas quanto-implied covariance is the most rel- 
evant measure for our purposes, data obtained from 
Kremens and Martin (2019) only cover the period between 
December 2009 and October 2015. Because our goal is to 
explain the fall and the rise of the dollar in debt mar- 
kets over the last two decades, we also resort to a longer 
time series containing similar information about forward- 
looking covariances. We use our model to generate similar 
predictions that we can test with other available data mea- 
suring forward-looking risk premia. A second limitation of 
the QRP data is that liquid quanto contracts only exist for 
maturities of two years and less. To remedy that limitation, 
we provide further evidence for the covariance over longer 
horizons using backward-looking measures in Section 4 . Fi- 
nally, quanto contracts give us information about the co- 
variance of the exchange rate and the S&P 500. Because 
our theory mainly applies to global ﬁrms that are exposed 
mostly to global shocks, we believe the S&P 500 provides 
a proxy. In Section 4 , we also provide backward-looking 
evidence on the covariances using the MSCI All Country 
World Index. 
To obtain long time series containing information about 
forward-looking covariances, we appeal to Theorem 2.2 , 
which provides a direct link between debt-currency de- 
nomination and anticipated relative inﬂation cyclicality un- 
der the assumption that relative PPP is an important deter- 
minant of exchange rates at horizons of average debt ma- 
turity. 12 
The explicit link between relative inﬂation dynamics 
and exchange rates is the key element behind Theorem 2.2 . 
Consistent with the predictions of Theorems 2.1 and 2.2 , 
both QRP and IRP measures point to the dollar being the 
dominant currency in the post-crisis period. The left panel 
of Fig. 2 shows the quanto-implied risk premium for the 
EUR/USD exchange rate taken directly from Kremens and 
Martin (2019) . The right-hand panel of Fig. 2 shows the 
inﬂation risk premia for the euro and the dollar for two 
years and for ﬁve years, taken directly from Hördahl and 
Tristani (2014) . 13 As we can see from this ﬁgure, in recent 
years, QRP entered the negative territory, whereas the dol- 
lar IRP went up relative to the euro QRP. Finally, note that 
Theorem 2.2 does not require US inﬂation to be counter- 
cyclical: what matters is the relative inﬂation dynamics be- 
12 Although the perfect link between exchange rates and inﬂation relies 
on a strong form of PPP, Theorem 2.2 would still hold true even with large 
PPP deviations, as long as the relative-inﬂation component of the ex- 
change rates contributed signiﬁcantly to the covariance (8) over the hori- 
zons of debt maturity of a typical ﬁrm. See Chernov and Creal (0 0 0 0) for 
evidence that PPP is an important driver of long-horizon currency risk 
premia. 
13 The same pattern is present for longer maturities. Moreover, the dif- 
ference between the dollar and the euro is more pronounced for longer 
maturities. 
578 

===== PAGE 9 =====

E. Eren and S. Malamud Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 571–589 
tween the two countries . Even if US inﬂation is procyclical, 
ﬁrms will still issue in dollars if they expect euro inﬂation 
to be lower US inﬂation in bad times. 
In a recent paper, Campbell et al. (0 0 0 0) ﬁnd 
US inﬂation became procyclical after 2001 [see also 
Baele et al. (2007) ]. The fact that the dollar has a higher 
IRP that the euro in the post-crisis period suggests that in- 
vestors anticipate US inﬂation to be less procyclical than 
that in the Eurozone. Note also Campbell et al. (0 0 0 0) in- 
vestigate inﬂation cyclicality over short horizons below one 
year. Our estimates of the covariance of CPI changes with 
stock market returns suggest that this covariance is con- 
sistently negative at horizons beyond three years; that is, 
inﬂation is countercyclical at horizons of debt maturity. 
3.2. The fall and the rise of the dollar 
In this section, we state and test two predictions linking 
QRP and IRP dynamics with the currency denomination of 
debt issuance. We start with the following important re- 
sult. 
Proposition 2 . If the distribution of debt-issuance costs across 
ﬁrms is constant over time, the quanto-implied covariance 
(11) is negatively related to the share of dollar-denominated 
debt issuance. 
Proposition 2 is a direct consequence of Theorem 2.1 : 
when (11) drops, the fraction of ﬁrms for which (6) holds 
increases, and hence, so does the dollar issuance. 14 An 
analogous result holds for IRP 15 : 
Proposition 3 . Under Assumption 2 , if the distribution of debt- 
issuance costs across ﬁrms is constant over time, then the dol- 
lar debt share is positively related to the dollar IRP and is 
negatively related to the euro IRP. 
In Fig. 3 , we show the volume and the currency com- 
position of gross issuance patterns of international debt 
as well as the shares of the dollar and the euro obtained 
from the BIS International Debt Securities statistics (data 
includes all sectors except the government). 
Broad trends shown in Fig. 1 for amounts outstanding, 
in Fig. 3 for debt issuance, and in Maggiori et al. (2019) for 
corporate debt holdings seem to be aligned with the trends 
in QRP and IRP documented in Fig. 2 . These joint dynam- 
ics of risk premia and dollar-debt quantities lend support 
to the debt view (Predictions 2 and 3 ). In particular, in 
14 Note that even if the quanto-implied covariance (11) is positive (as 
it was before 2015), ﬁrms may still prefer issuing in dollars as long as 
doing so is cheaper than issuing in euros. For example, according to 
Velandia and Cabral (2017) , “In the case of Mexico, the average bid-ask 
spread of the yield to maturity on outstanding dollar-denominated inter- 
national bonds is seven basis points, compared to 10 basis points for out- 
standing euro-denominated bonds. Mexico is also an example with very 
liquid benchmarks on both currencies.” The dollar convenience yield fur- 
ther ampliﬁes this effect ( Jiang et al., 0 0 0 0 ). 
15 In our model, IRP can be viewed as a barometer of market expecta- 
tions about inﬂation cyclicality. Although our model is silent about the 
origins of these expectations, one might speculate that the observed pat- 
tern in inﬂation risk premia between the euro and the dollar, shown in 
Fig. 2 , may be due to declining expectations of inﬂation stabilization and 
an increasing expected risk of deﬂation in the eurozone following the 
Global Financial Crisis in 2008 and the European Debt Crisis in 2011. 
the pre-crisis period, IRP for the euro was higher than 
the IRP for the dollar, and after the crisis, this relation- 
ship reversed. In line with our predictions, the share of 
dollar debt was in decline before the crisis and increased 
after the crisis. Moreover, during the period for which we 
have data, the QRP of the euro against the dollar declined 
strongly. 
Both the QRP and the IRP dynamics suggest that debt 
holders caring about inﬂation and foreign-exchange risk 
should dislike holding dollar-denominated debt and prefer 
holding euro-denominated debt in the post-crisis period. 
However, the debt view implies ﬁrms will still prefer to is- 
sue debt in dollars because of the attractive risk properties 
of the dollar. 
3.3. QRP, IRP, And debt-issuance dynamics 
Whereas broader trends in debt-currency choice and 
currency and inﬂation risk premia are in line with 
our predictions, we would now like to formally test 
Propositions 2 and 3 about the response of dollar-debt is- 
suance to movements in risk premia. One distinctive fea- 
ture of our theory is that changes to debt-issuance cur- 
rency are driven by expectations and could change quickly. 
We regress various measures of the dollar’s share in debt 
markets on changes in risk premia at a quarterly frequency. 
First, we test Proposition 2 : as the euro becomes less of 
a hedge for ﬁrms, that is, as QRP declines, do they issue 
more dollar debt? Second, we test Proposition 3 : as the 
euro IRP becomes lower than the dollar IRP, do ﬁrms is- 
sue more dollar debt? 
We report the results in Table 1 . Column (1) shows a 
one-standard-deviation decrease in QRP 2 Y 
e / $ ,t , which 
is around 0.01, is associated with around three-percentage- 
points-higher dollar share in debt issuance in a given quar- 
ter. Note the average of the total issuance is $1.284 trillion. 
Hence, three percentage points amount to around $38 bil- 
lion in a quarter. In column (2), we rerun the regression 
with a linear time trend, and in column (3), we control 
for total issuance. The results are qualitatively similar. In 
columns (4), (5), and (6), we rerun the same type of re- 
gressions for the dollar share in debt issuance and inﬂa- 
tion risk premia in the US and the eurozone. The results 
suggest that whereas debt-issuance patterns do not move 
much with inﬂation risk premia in the US, they mostly 
react to the inﬂation-risk-premia movements in the euro- 
zone. Thus, the decline of the euro as a preferred currency 
for debt issuance might be due to rising deﬂation risk in 
the eurozone after the European sovereign debt crisis. The 
magnitude is also sizable as the results suggest a one- 
standard-deviation decrease in the eurozone IRP (which is 
0.02) corresponds to around four-percentage-point-higher 
dollar share in debt issuance. 16 
The above regression results provide additional support 
for our theory. Moreover, the effects we identify hold in a 
relatively high frequency, lending support to another pre- 
diction of our theory: changes in the currency of debt is- 
16 In the Appendix, we report the results for non-bank and bank debt 
issuance separately. The results are similar for both sectors. 
579 

===== PAGE 10 =====

E. Eren and S. Malamud Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 571–589 
Fig. 3. Gross issuance of international debt securities. Source: BIS International Debt Securities. 
Table 1 
QRP, IRP, debt-currency choice. 
Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ denote signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% 
levels, respectively. Debt-issuance data includes all sectors except the government. Latest observed values 
of QRP 2 Y 
e / $ ,t , I RP 2 Y 
$ ,t, and I RP 2 Y 
e ,t in a given quarter are used. QRP 2 Y 
e / $ ,t data come from Kremens and Mar- 
tin (2019) , and IRP 2 Y 
$ ,t and IRP 2 Y 
e ,t are recovered using the methodology in Hördahl and Tristani (2014) . 
Trend refers to a linear time trend and control refers to the inclusion of total issuance as a control variable. 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
Sample: Full Full Full Full Full Full 
USD shr 
t USD shr 
t USD shr 
t USD shr 
t USD shr 
t USD shr 
t 
–3.463 ∗∗∗ –1.574 ∗∗ –3.505 ∗∗∗
(0.314) (0.680) (0.305) 
IRP 2 Y 
$ ,t –0.00612 –0.00870 0.0330 
(0.0197) (0.0254) (0.0232) 
–0.201 ∗∗∗ –0.194 ∗∗∗ –0.200 ∗∗∗
(0.0266) (0.0406) (0.0251) 
Trend X X 
Control X X 
Period 09q4-15q3 09q4-15q3 09q4-15q3 99q1-19q4 99q1-19q4 99q1-19q4 
Observations 24 24 24 84 84 84 
R-squared 0.713 0.783 0.781 0.340 0.341 0.449 
suance respond to expectations and therefore could occur 
relatively quickly. 
3.4. Exchange-rate expectations or convenience yield: What 
drives debt-issuance dynamics? 
Issuing dollar-denominated debt is cheap, not only due 
to more liquid markets and lower underwriting costs 
( Velandia and Cabral, 2017 ), but also due to signiﬁcant 
investor demand for dollar assets that creates a conve- 
nience yield for dollar-denominated safe assets ( Jiang et al., 
0 0 0 0 ). Liao (2020) computes a measure that captures the 
FX-hedged corporate borrowing-cost differential, the cor- 
porate basis , which is effectively the convenience yield of 
dollar-denominated corporate debt. A higher corporate ba- 
sis between the dollar and the euro means borrowing in 
dollars is cheaper than borrowing in euros, making the 
dollar-issuance cost q ($) in equation (6) effectively nega- 
tive. When this basis is changing over time, a direct ana- 
log of Proposition 2 implies dollar-debt-issuance dynamics 
could potentially be driven both by the corporate basis and 
the hedging properties of the dollar. 
In this section, we rerun the regressions in Table 1 , also 
controlling for the corporate basis to explain the dynam- 
ics of the global dollar share of debt issuance. We report 
the results of this regression in Table 2 , which shows the 
signs on QRP and IRP and their statistical signiﬁcance re- 
main unchanged, lending further support to the debt view. 
Moreover, the sign of the coeﬃcient on the corporate basis 
is negative (i.e., “the wrong sign”), suggesting that, in ag- 
gregate, ﬂuctuations in the convenience yield do not drive 
debt-issuance dynamics. 
4. Evidence from backward-looking measures 
Our key theoretical condition posits that ﬁrms pre- 
fer to issue in dollars if they expect the dollar exchange 
rate to positively co-move with their stock market re- 
turns over their debt-maturity horizons. 17 Whereas the 
17 In fact, given that issuing in dollars is cheaper than issuing in any 
other currency, condition (6) implies that ﬁrms would issue all their debt 
in dollars even if this correlation were negative, but not too negative rel- 
ative to the cost gain of issuing in dollars. 
580 

===== PAGE 11 =====

E. Eren and S. Malamud Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 571–589 
Table 2 
QRP, IRP, corporate basis, and debt-currency choice: exchange-rate expectations versus convenience yield. 
Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ denote signiﬁcance at the 10$, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. 
Debt-issuance data includes all sectors except the government. The latest observed values of QRP 2 Y 
e / $ ,t , IRP 2 Y 
$ ,t, and IRP 2 Y 
e ,t in 
a given quarter are used. QRP 2 Y 
e / $ ,t data come from Kremens and Martin (2019) , IRP 2 Y 
$ ,t and IRP 2 Y 
e ,t are recovered using the 
methodology in Hördahl and Tristani (2014) , and Corp.Basis t data come from Liao (2020) . Different sample periods are due 
to differences in data availability, and multiple columns provide robustness checks by aligning sample periods. 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
USD shr 
t USD shr 
t USD shr 
t USD shr 
t USD shr 
t USD shr 
t USD shr 
t 
–3.463 ∗∗∗ –1.566 ∗∗
(0.314) (0.718) 
Corp.Basis t –0.00113 –0.00295 ∗∗∗ –0.00182 ∗∗ –0.000846 ∗
(0.000786) (0.000450) (0.000772) (0.000451) 
IRP 2 Y 
$ ,t –0.00612 0.0393 0.0435 ∗
(0.0197) (0.0259) (0.0251) 
–0.201 ∗∗∗ –0.192 ∗∗∗ –0.186 ∗∗∗
(0.0266) (0.0239) (0.0232) 
Period 09q4-15q3 03q4-16q2 09q4-15q3 09q4-15q3 99q1-19q4 03q4-16q2 03q4-16q2 
Observations 24 51 24 24 84 51 51 
R-squared 0.713 0.053 0.747 0.783 0.340 0.527 0.555 
quanto-implied QRP is the ideal empirical measure of such 
forward-looking expectations, the most extended maturity 
of liquid quanto contracts is two years, and the average 
debt maturity of a ﬁrm is typically much longer. In this 
subsection, we investigate backward-looking measures of 
the dollar-stock market co-movement, arguing that ratio- 
nal agents might use these measures as a basis for their 
forward-looking expectations. 
We use two stock market indices to test our predic- 
tions, namely, the S&P 500 and the MSCI AC World Index 
measured in dollars, to be consistent with our theoretical 
conditions. For this subsection, we use the trade-weighted 
dollar index against major currencies, including those in 
eurozone, Canada, Japan, the UK, Switzerland, Australia, 
and Sweden, as obtained from the FRED database. 18 We 
conduct our analysis by ﬁrst looking at simple covariances, 
then through a VAR analysis to gauge the lead-lag relation- 
ships between stock indices and the dollar. In the Internet 
Appendix, we also provide results using the bilateral ex- 
change rates between the dollar and the euro, 19 the yen, 
the pound, and the Swiss franc. 
4.1. Why is the dollar the dominant currency? results with 
the dollar index 
Given that the dollar is the most common currency 
of denomination in international debt markets, the ﬁrst 
prediction of our model is that the returns on the dol- 
lar index positively correlate with the returns on the 
stock market indices at horizons that correspond to the 
typical debt maturity [see Section 5 , Choi et al. (2018) ; 
Cortina et al. (2018) ]. To test this prediction, we ﬁrst 
run the following regressions for the horizons of h ∈ 
18 Our results are robust when we use other indices such as the narrow 
or the broad dollar index obtained from the BIS. 
19 We use the Deutsche mark prior to the introduction of the euro using 
the euro/Deutsche mark exchange rate at the time of the inception of the 
euro. 
{ 3 , 12 , 24 , 36 , 48 , 60 , 72 , 84 , 96 , 108 , 120 } months: 20 
Ret _ USD t−h,t = αh + βh Ret _ StockIndex t−h,t + ϵt−h,t . (12) 
Here, Ret _ USD t−h,t and Ret _ StockIndex t−h,t denote the  
rolling (overlapping) returns on the dollar index and the 
two indices we use (in two separate regressions) over h 
months, respectively. Fig. 4 reports the results for the re- 
gression coeﬃcient βh for different horizons and for differ- 
ent stock market indices, together with the 95% conﬁdence 
intervals. The sample period for the MSCI series starts in 
January 1988. The round dots and the corresponding solid 
lines in both panels represent the point estimates and 95% 
conﬁdence intervals obtained using a sample period be- 
tween January 1988 and December 2019. The squared dot 
and the corresponding dashed lines on the left-hand panel 
represent the point estimates and 95% conﬁdence intervals 
obtained using a sample period between January 1973 and 
December 2019 for the S&P 500 and the FRED dollar index. 
The results show a pattern of negative betas at short 
horizons and positive and mostly increasing betas at longer 
horizons. The negative betas for shorter horizons are con- 
sistent with the ﬁndings in Gourinchas et al. (2017) and 
Gourinchas (2019) , who show the dollar tends to appreci- 
ate in bad times. 21 However, Fig. 4 suggests the sign of the 
relationship reverts for typical horizons of debt maturity. 22 
These ﬁndings, together with condition (8) , suggest global 
20 We then control for autocorrelation at the respective horizons by us- 
ing the Newey-West correction with the respective number of lags. 
21 In this paper, we focus on the choices of ﬁrms and hence the medium 
run risk properties of the dollar, and abstract from frictions that house- 
holds face. However, one can argue that in a more realistic model with 
more frictions and differences in relevant horizons between households 
and ﬁrms, the short-run appreciation in bad times provides insurance to 
investors with shorter horizons and safety demand, and the medium-run 
depreciation of the dollar provides insurance to ﬁrms with longer matu- 
rity nominal debt, thereby reinforcing the dominant international role of 
the dollar. 
22 Interestingly enough, the same pattern of sign reversal at longer 
horizons is also observed in the behavior of UIP deviations. See 
Valchev (2015) and Engel (2016) . Understanding the links between these 
ﬁndings and our results is an interesting direction for future research. 
581 

===== PAGE 12 =====

E. Eren and S. Malamud Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 571–589 
Fig. 4. The betas of the USD index returns with respect to stock market returns. The graphs report the regression coeﬃcients βh from the regressions 
(12) . Standard errors are corrected using the Newey-West procedure with the number of lags being equal to the horizon h of returns for each respective 
regression. The round dots and the corresponding solid lines in both panels represent the point estimates, βh , and 95% conﬁdence intervals obtained using 
a sample period between January 1988 and December 2019. The squared dot and the corresponding dashed lines on the left-hand panel represent the 
point estimates, βh , and 95% conﬁdence intervals obtained using a sample period between January 1973 and December 2019 for the S&P 500 and the FRED 
dollar index. 
ﬁrms, whose stock returns co-move with the S&P 500 or 
the MSCI AC World Index, are better off if they borrow in 
dollars rather than in other major international currencies 
if their debt maturity is suﬃciently long. 
In the Internet Appendix, we repeat the same exercise 
with non-overlapping observations. Whereas the statistical 
signiﬁcance is hard to establish in that case due to a re- 
markable drop in sample sizes, the pattern of short-term 
negative dollar betas, followed by positive betas at longer 
horizons, is present in that exercise as well. 
Why does the sign of the co-movement between the 
dollar index and the stock market change for longer hori- 
zons? To answer this question, we decompose the covari- 
ance between the dollar and the stock market based on the 
additivity of log-returns: Ret t−h −j,t = R t −h −j,t −h + R t−h,t 
for any pair h, j > 0 . Using this decomposition, we get 
that 
Cov (Ret _ USD t−h −j,t , Ret _ SP 500 t−h −j,t ) 
= Cov (Ret _ USD t −h −j,t −h , R et _ SP 500 t −h −j,t −h ) + Cov (Ret _ USD t−h,t , Ret _ SP 500 t−h,t ) 
   
co−mov ement 
+ Cov (Ret _ USD t −h −j,t −h , R et _ SP 500 t−h −j,t ) 
   
USD leading S& P500 
+ Cov (Ret _ SP 500 t −h −j,t −h , R et _ USD t−h,t ) 
   
S& P500 leading USD 
. (13) 
Because the co-movement terms in the covariance de- 
composition are negative for shorter horizons, whereas the 
total covariance is positive for longer horizons (see Fig. 4 ), 
at least one of the lead-lag terms in (13) must be positive 
and suﬃciently large to offset the negative co-movement 
terms. 
4.2. VAR Analysis 
To understand the impact of the lead-lag relationships 
in (13) on the joint dynamics of the dollar and S&P 500, 
we estimate the following two-lag VAR model at annual 
frequency (selected based on the standard Akaike informa- 
tion criterion (AIC)): 
(
Ret _ USD t−1 ,t 
Ret _ SP 500 t−1 ,t 
)
= /Psi1
(
Ret _ USD t −2 ,t −1 
Ret _ SP 500 t −2 ,t −1 
)
+ /Gamma1
(
Ret _ USD t −3 ,t −2 
Ret _ SP 500 t −3 ,t −2 
)
+ ε t , 
where /Psi1= 
(
/Psi11 , 1 /Psi11 , 2 
/Psi12 , 1 /Psi12 , 2 
)
and /Gamma1= 
(
/Gamma11 , 1 /Gamma11 , 2 
/Gamma12 , 1 /Gamma12 , 2 
)
and 
ε t ∼ N(0 , /Sigma1) for some 2 ×2 covariance matrix /Sigma1. 
The results of this VAR are reported in Table 3 . We 
ﬁnd ˆ /Psi11 , 2 > 0 > ˆ /Sigma11 , 2 , so that the dollar and S&P 500 co- 
move negatively contemporaneously, but the lagged return 
on the S&P 500 positively predicts the dollar. 23 This ﬁnding 
is consistent with the decomposition (13) and Fig. 4 : This 
23 Although the results are statistically signiﬁcant at the 10% level for 
the entire sample 1973–2019, our early sample was characterized by the 
end of the Bretton Woods era and the associated outlier of event of ex- 
treme dollar depreciation. If we restrict our sample to 1976–2019, the co- 
eﬃcient is 0.15, signiﬁcant at 5% level. In the paper, we report the results 
using the entire sample of available data; however, results based on dif- 
ferent sample periods are available upon request. 
582 

===== PAGE 13 =====

E. Eren and S. Malamud Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 571–589 
Fig. 5. Cumulative Impulse-Response Functions of a Shock to S&P 500. Figures show the cumulative impulse-response functions of a negative 1 ppt shock 
to the S&P 500 based on the estimates of a VAR(2) model of the yearly returns on the S&P 500 and the FRED dollar index against major currencies 
(DTWEXM) between 1973 and 2019, reported in Table 3 . The lines in each graph represent the cumulative impulse-response functions. The darker shaded 
areas represent the 90% conﬁdence intervals, and the lighter shaded areas represent the 95% conﬁdence intervals. Source: Datastream, FRED, authors’ 
calculations. 
Table 3 
A VAR(2) model of the S&P 500 and the FRED dollar 
index. 
Standard errors that are adjusted for small-sample de- 
grees of freedom are in parentheses. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ de- 
note signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, re- 
spectively. The coeﬃcients are from a VAR(2) model 
of non-overlapping annual returns on the S&P 500 
and the FRED dollar index against major currencies 
(DTWEXM) between 1973 and 2019. 
(1) (2) 
Ret _ SP500 t−1 ,t Ret _ USD t−1 ,t 
Ret _ SP500 t −2 ,t −1 –0.0856 0.122 ∗
(0.147) (0.0661) 
Ret _ SP500 t −3 ,t −2 –0.202 0.0494 
(0.146) (0.0657) 
Ret _ USD t −2 ,t −1 0.310 0.322 ∗∗
(0.335) (0.151) 
Ret _ USD t −3 ,t −2 –0.240 –0.291 ∗∗
(0.329) (0.148) 
Observations 45 45 
R-squared 0.0714 0.2073 
lead-lag relationship is responsible for the sign change in 
Fig. 4 at longer horizons. 24 
Next, we use our estimates from the VAR model to 
compute the cumulative impulse response of both the dol- 
lar and the S&P 500 following a negative shock to the S&P 
500. As one can see from Fig. 5 , the cumulative impact of 
a negative shock to the S&P 500 on the dollar is a signif- 
icant depreciation at a 5% level two and six years follow- 
ing the shock and a signiﬁcant depreciation at a 10% level 
for most horizons. 25 In the Internet Appendix, we report 
the VAR regressions results for the MSCI World Index (for 
24 The variance-covariance matrix for the error terms is estimated as: 
ˆ /Sigma1= 
(
0 . 0256 
−0 . 0016 0 . 00516 
)
. 
25 Similar to the VAR coeﬃcients, the impulse responses are also 
stronger if we restrict the period to 1976–2019, with statistical signiﬁ- 
which we have data from 1988 onwards). The results are 
qualitatively similar, but stronger and statistically signiﬁ- 
cant at the 5% level for the MSCI World Index - in part 
also reﬂecting the stronger relationship in the later sample 
periods reported in Fig. 4 . 
Fig. 5 complements Fig. 4 , providing additional evi- 
dence for longer-run co-movement between the dollar and 
stock market. Whereas historical covariance estimates in 
Fig. 4 are based on overlapping returns, our VAR model 
is estimated with non-overlapping returns, allowing us to 
leverage a longer sample. All in all, despite signiﬁcant 
small-sample issues, our results based on historical data 
point toward the same direction: The choice of the dollar 
over other major currencies by debt issuers is consistent 
with the empirical evidence on the joint dynamics of the 
dollar and the stock market. 26 
5. Debt currency and maturity choice 
Our results in Section 4 have direct implications for 
the link between debt maturity and the incentives to is- 
sue dollar-denominated debt. Namely, as the dollar’s co- 
movement with the stock market increases over longer 
horizons, we expect that ﬁrms would not be indifferent 
between issuing short-term dollar debt and rolling it over 
and issuing long-term debt. In particular, we predict that 
ﬁrms would prefer issuing their longer-maturity debt in 
dollars. 
We use data at the bond-issuance level to formally 
test the hypothesis that the propensity to issue dollar- 
cance at 5% for almost all horizons. These results are also available upon 
request. 
26 In the Internet Appendix to this section, we also present results using 
bilateral exchange rates instead of the dollar index - results are qualita- 
tively similar. Moreover, we discuss the international role of the pound 
versus the yen in relation to our theory and as supporting evidence for 
our mechanism. 
583 

===== PAGE 14 =====

E. Eren and S. Malamud Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 571–589 
denominated debt increases with debt maturity. We re- 
strict our attention to banks and non-banks separately and 
have a sample period between 1999 (the introduction of 
the euro) and the end of 2019. The dataset includes perpet- 
ual bonds as well. To have them in the analysis, we win- 
sorize the maturity of the bonds at 5%, both at the lower 
and upper tail of their maturity distribution. Winsorizing 
the maturity at 10% or 2.5% or winsorizing only the right 
tail of the distribution does not change the results materi- 
ally. We exclude data on the government sector and focus 
only on private-sector bond issuance. 
We use data from Dealogic in which observations are at 
the ISIN level of bond issuance. To keep the timing of our 
analysis similar to the previous sections, we restrict the 
sample to bonds issued between January 1999 and Decem- 
ber 2019. Our dataset includes a total of 706,924 bonds, 
issued by 61,910 ﬁrms that are headquartered in 121 dif- 
ferent countries. 
The dataset includes information on the identity of the 
ﬁrm, the country where it is headquartered, and the indus- 
try, as well as information on the bonds, such as the cur- 
rency denomination, date of issuance, maturity date, issued 
amount denominated in the local currency of the ﬁrm’s 
headquarters, and whether the bond is investment grade 
or is not. In the full sample, the mean of the winsorized 
maturity is 3408 days, with a standard deviation of 3485 
days; the minimum value is 365 days, and the maximum 
value is 11,681 days. 
The dollar co-movement with the stock market in- 
creases over longer horizons as documented in Section 4 . 
An implication of this result through the lens of our model 
is that the propensity to issue dollar-denominated debt 
should increase with debt maturity. Following our results 
in Section 4 , we test the hypothesis that longer debt 
maturity is associated with a higher propensity to issue 
dollar-denominated debt using micro-level data on bond 
issuance. 
To measure the propensity to issue dollar-denominated 
debt, we use 1 (USD ) , which is a dummy variable that takes 
the value of 1 if the currency denomination of the bond 
is the dollar. Then, the independent variables of interest 
in our regressions become Mat urit y w , which is the win- 
sorized and standardized value of maturity at the 5% level. 
According to our hypothesis, we expect a positive coeﬃ- 
cient for this variable. 
Other control variables are the size of the issuance and 
a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if the bond is in- 
vestment grade. Moreover, depending on the speciﬁcation, 
we include Industry ∗Month , Country ∗Month , and f irm ∗
Month ﬁxed effects. We cluster the standard errors at the 
Country ∗Year level. 27 
We run different linear regressions, varying the ﬁxed 
effects used, and making different cuts of the sample to 
test the predictions of our theory. Table 4 presents the re- 
sults. 
27 In the benchmark speciﬁcation, we use the country where the par- 
ent company of the issuer is headquartered. As a robustness check, we 
use the residence of the issuer instead. Our results then are virtually un- 
changed. 
The ﬁrst two columns control for bond characteristics 
as well as Industry ∗Month and Country ∗Month ﬁxed ef- 
fects for non-banks (in the ﬁrst column) and for banks 
(in the second column). The coeﬃcient on Mat urit y w sug- 
gests a one-standard-deviation increase in maturity in- 
creases the likelihood of the currency denomination of the 
bond to be dollars by 1.5 percentage points for non-banks 
and 3 percentage points for banks. 
Next, as part of our identiﬁcation strategy, we rely on 
ﬁrms that issue multiple bonds in at least two differ- 
ent currencies in a given month. This choice allows us to 
tightly identify that the same ﬁrm that has access to mul- 
tiple markets chooses to issue the longer-maturity bond 
in dollars as opposed to issuing in other currencies. In 
columns (4) and (5), we run a similar regression for non- 
banks and banks, respectively, with F irm ∗Month ﬁxed ef- 
fects. Although the result for non-banks is of a similar 
magnitude for non-banks, it is statistically insigniﬁcant. On 
the other hand, the result goes through for banks. 
Finally, in columns (5) and (6), we further restrict the 
sample to ﬁrms that are from the US, the eurozone, Japan, 
Switzerland, or the UK and repeat the exercise in (3) and 
(4). This aims to address a potential concern that our re- 
sults in (3) and (4) are driven by the fact that ﬁrms in 
emerging markets could only access dollar-bond-issuance 
markets. Focusing only on the ﬁve countries with liquid 
and deep capital markets alleviates this concern, because 
these ﬁrms could potentially issue in their home currency 
or any other major currency. The results from these regres- 
sions are in line with our hypotheses both for banks and 
non-banks. 
6. Dynamic capital structure choice 
Our main theoretical result in Theorem 2.1 is based on 
the assumption that capital-structure choice is static. That 
is, when a ﬁrm issues debt at time t = 0 , it does not re- 
optimize until the debt expires. In reality, a ﬁrm could dy- 
namically readjust its capital structure by frequently buy- 
ing back old debt or issuing new debt. In this case, a key 
concern could be that the maturity of originally issued 
debt may not be the relevant horizon at which to evaluate 
the correlation of cash ﬂows and debt value. This concern 
would be all the more important due to the difference in 
the sign of the covariance between the dollar and the stock 
market at short versus long horizons. 28 
In this section, we investigate the consequences of al- 
lowing ﬁrms to adjust their capital structure dynamically. 
Accounting for this case is a theoretical challenge due 
to complexities that arise from non-linear feedback ef- 
fects from policy functions (i.e., leverage choice) in the fu- 
ture into capital-structure choice in the current period. To 
28 Although these concerns are valid, note that as 
Korteweg et al. (2018) show, the average ﬁrm rebalances its capital 
structure once every ﬁve quarters. According to the results in Section 4 , 
the safe-haven properties of the dollar do not last for ﬁve quarters, par- 
tially alleviating these concerns. Moreover, Korteweg et al. (2018) show 
about 50% of ﬁrms issue long-term debt and rebalance their capital 
structure infrequently, whereas 17% of ﬁrms never adjust leverage. These 
facts suggest the static capital-structure-choice assumption is roughly 
consistent with many ﬁrms’ decisions in the data. 
584 

===== PAGE 15 =====

E. Eren and S. Malamud Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 571–589 
Table 4 
Debt-maturity and debt-currency choice. 
Standard errors clustered by Country ∗Year in parantheses. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ denote signiﬁcance at the 10%, 
5%, and 1% levels, respectively. 1 (USD ) is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if the currency 
of the issued bond is the dollar. Mat urit y w is the standardized value of maturity winsorized at 5% and 
95% levels. Controls include the size of the issuance and a dummy variable for whether the bond is 
investment grade. NB refers to the sample of non-bank ﬁnancials and non-ﬁnancial corporations. B 
refers to the sample of banks. Columns (3), (4), (5), and (6) only include ﬁrms that issue in at least 
two currencies in a given month. † means that the sample is further restricted only to those ﬁrms that 
are from the US, the eurozone, Japan, Switzerland or the UK. 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
Sample: NB B NB B NB † B † 
1 (USD ) 1 (USD ) 1 (USD ) 1 (USD ) 1 (USD ) 1 (USD ) 
Mat urit y w 0.0149 ∗∗∗ 0.0299 ∗∗∗ 0.0163 0.0770 ∗∗∗ 0.0350 ∗∗ 0.0734 ∗∗∗
(0.00339) (0.00787) (0.0138) (0.0126) (0.0157) (0.0155) 
Controls X X X X X X 
Industry ∗Month FE X X 
Country ∗Month FE X X 
Firm ∗Month FE X X X X 
Observations 457,266 243,657 46,562 67,213 31,857 49,268 
R-squared 0.684 0.665 0.450 0.432 0.475 0.472 
Mean of Dep. Var 0.556 0.534 0.376 0.348 0.430 0.350 
the best of our knowledge, we present the ﬁrst theoreti- 
cal characterization of dynamic capital-structure decisions 
with the currency composition of debt. We derive suﬃ- 
cient conditions that lead to the dollar’s dominance in a 
dynamic setup and provide further empirical evidence in 
line with the theory. 
6.1. Theory 
We extend our baseline model by introducing an inter- 
mediate period at which ﬁrms can rebalance their debt by 
either issuing new debt or buying back old debt at its mar- 
ket value. Essentially, we consider a three-period model 
with t = 0 , 1 , 2 , where the ﬁrm issues debt at t = 0 that 
matures at t = 2 . The ﬁrm generates after-tax proﬁts Y t at 
t = 1 , 2 . At t = 1 , the ﬁrm can reoptimize its leverage de- 
cisions by calling back debt or issuing more debt. 
To characterize the optimal dynamic leverage policy, 
we need several technical conditions. In what follows, we 
make the following assumptions: 
Assumption 3 . We have 
• τ −q (j) is small for all j. 
• cash ﬂows Y 1 are small relative to Y 2 . 
• Y 2 = /Omega12 Z 1 Z 2 , where idiosyncratic shocks Z t are i.i.d. 
with the density ℓZ ℓ −1 on [0,1], and are independent of 
aggregate shocks. 
• For any aggregate shock realization at time t = 1 , the 
best ﬁrm (i.e., the ﬁrm with Z 1 = 1 ) does not default 
(i.e., some ﬁrms survive even the worst crises). 
• The “marginal” ﬁrm with a Z 1 realization that is indif- 
ferent between defaulting and not defaulting at t = 1 
does not issue new debt at time t = 1 . 29 
Our ﬁrst result is the following: 
29 The last two conditions are natural and can be formulated as para- 
metric restrictions on the underlying aggregate shocks. See the Internet 
Appendix. 
Proposition 4 (The leverage ratchet effect). Suppose either 
Assumption 3 holds or currency volatilities are suﬃciently 
small. Then, even if the ﬁrm has issued long-term debt (ma- 
turing at time t = 2 ) in multiple currencies at time t = 0 , 
buying back any of this debt at time t = 1 is never optimal. 
At the same time, issuing more debt at time t = 1 might be 
optimal. 
This proposition is an extension of the classic leverage 
ratchet effect of Admati et al. (2018) to the case of debt is- 
sued in multiple currencies. The intuition is the same as 
in Admati et al. (2018) : buying back debt makes share- 
holders forego all the tax beneﬁts for which the debt has 
been issued in the ﬁrst place, making it suboptimal to re- 
duce leverage. Thus, the optimal amount of debt is mono- 
tonically increasing (or stays constant) over time. With dy- 
namic debt issuance, a novel effect that may occur is that 
buying back debt makes issuing new debt cheaper. Thus, 
one may ask if a substitution effect may occur: a ﬁrm buys 
back debt in one currency and issues debt in another cur- 
rency. Trivially, the magnitude of the reduction in issuance 
costs is proportional to the optimal new-debt-issuance 
amount. The ﬁrst item of our technical Assumption 3 above 
guarantees that taking high leverage is never optimal for 
the ﬁrm, and as a result, “debt reshuﬄing” is never op- 
timal. Similarly, if currency volatilities are small, the gain 
from reshuﬄing the risk proﬁle is too small to justify the 
loss of tax beneﬁts. 
We will denote by r t (j) = −log E[ M t E j,t ] the country- j
nominal interest rate for horizon t. The following theorem 
derives conditions for the optimality of issuing dollar debt 
both at t = 0 and t = 1 : 
Theorem 6.1 . Issuing only dollar debt both at time t = 0 and 
t = 1 is optimal if and only if the following two conditions 
holds: 
• Cov 1 (/Omega1−ℓ 
2 , E j, 2 ) ≥ 0 for all j. 
585 

===== PAGE 16 =====

E. Eren and S. Malamud Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 571–589 
• We have 
q ($) −q (j) 
τ −q ($) 
≤ Cov $ (/Omega1−ℓ 
2 , E j, 2 ) 
E $ [/Omega1−ℓ 
2 ] E $ [ E j, 2 ] 
+ 
E $ [/Omega1−ℓ 
2 E j, 2 ] 
E $ [/Omega1−ℓ 
2 ] E $ [ E j, 2 ] 
c 1 (e r 2 ($) −r 1 ($) −e r 2 (j) −r 1 (j) ) 
c 1 e r 2 (j) −r 1 (j) + c 2 
(14) 
In particular, if q ($) = q (j) for all j, then a suﬃcient con- 
dition for issuing only dollar-denominated debt is that 
(a) the dollar is the riskiest currency so that 
Cov $ 
t (/Omega1−ℓ 
2 , E j, 2 ) ≥ 0 for all ja n d t = 0 , 1 , and 
(b) the dollar has the largest term premium: r 2 ($) −
r 1 ($) > r 2 (j) −r 1 (j) . 
The intuition behind Theorem 6.1 is as follows. Firms 
issue debt due to the tax beneﬁts of doing so, and op- 
timal capital structure is determined by the trade-off be- 
tween the tax beneﬁts and the risk of default. At the time 
t = 1 , debt is issued to be held until it expires. Hence, 
Theorem 2.1 applies and the inequality Cov $ 
1 (/Omega1−ℓ 
2 , E j, 2 ) ≥ 0 
is necessary and suﬃcient for the optimality of dollar debt. 
The situation at t = 0 is more complex. From the time 
t = 0 point of view, both the tax beneﬁts and the effec- 
tive costs of default (due to the lost cash ﬂows) accrue at 
times t = 1 and t = 2 when the coupon is paid. Because 
by assumption, most of the cash ﬂows occur at time t = 2 , 
highest costs of default also occur at this time. Thus, the 
trade-off can be decomposed as: 
trade −of f ≈ tax benef its (t =1) + tax benef its (t = 2) 
− default  cost(t = 2) . 
The default cost itself can be decomposed further into 
default  cost(t = 2) = a v erage cost(t = 2) 
+ cost from co −mov ement with F X (t = 2) . 
As in Theorem 2.1 , the trade-off between tax benef its (t = 
2) and the cost from co −mov ement with F X(t = 2) is de- 
termined by Cov $ (/Omega1−ℓ 
2 , E j, 2 ) . Thus, we are left with the 
second, purely inter-temporal part of the trade-off: 
int ert emporal trade −of f = tax benef its (t = 1) 
−a v erage cost(t = 2) . 
Naturally, this trade-off is determined by the slope of the 
yield curve: the tax beneﬁts at time t = 1 are discounted 
at the rate r 1 (j) , whereas the default cost paid at time 
t = 2 is discounted at the rate r 2 (j) . The larger the differ- 
ence r 2 (j) −r 1 (j) , the stronger the incentive to issue debt 
in currency j, get the tax beneﬁts at t = 1 , and pay the cost 
at time t = 2 . 
6.2. Empirical evidence 
In this section, we provide empirical evidence show- 
ing the yield-curve slope differential between the dollar 
and the euro is a relevant variable for the choice of cur- 
rency in debt issuance. 30 We view this evidence as ad- 
30 Note that, in theory, we have r t (j) = −log E[ M t E j,t ] the country- j
nominal interest rate for horizon t. r t (j) are the non-annualized interest 
rates. Therefore, we scale back the yields that we obtain from the yield 
curves to reﬂect the non-annualized interest rates. 
Fig. 6. Yield curve slope differentials and dollar debt share. 
ditional support of the “debt view”: the fact that dollar- 
debt issuance is (at least partially) driven by ﬁrms’ optimal 
capital-structure choices. 
Similarly to Propositions 2 and 3, Theorem 6.1 implies a 
positive relationship between the yield-curve slope differ- 
ential, (r 2 ($) −r 1 ($)) − (r 2 (j) −r 1 (j)) and dollar-debt is- 
suance. Fig. 6 illustrates that the 5y-6m difference be- 
tween the US Treasury and the German bund curve has 
largely been positive and increasing since 2008, whereas 
it was negative and at times decreasing before 2008. This 
ﬁnding is in line with the decline of the share of dollar 
debt before 2008 and the subsequent rise of this share af- 
ter 2008 (see Fig. 4 ). 31 Moreover, we show in a regres- 
sion that these differences are positively associated with 
the share of dollar debt for various horizons. In Table 5 , 
we show the results of a simple regression of the share 
of dollar-debt issuance at a given time t on the differ- 
ence between the slopes of the yield curves between the 
US and Germany. Our independent variable, denoted as 
Dif f US,DE 
r 2 ,r 1 ,t , equals (r 2 (US) −r 1 (US)) − (r 2 (DE) −r 1 (DE)) in 
the notation of Theorem 6.1 . As one can see, consistent 
with Theorem 6.1 , the relationship is positive and highly 
signiﬁcant for all horizon combinations. 
7. The debt view during the COVID-19 crisis and its 
aftermath 
The COVID-19 crisis in March 2020 and its aftermath 
also provide a useful test for our theory. According to our 
theory, ﬁrms borrow in dollars as opposed to other major 
currencies, due to the expectation that the dollar would 
depreciate following a bad global shock relative to other 
currencies (see Section 4.2 and Fig. 5 ). Furthermore, the 
rising share of the dollar-debt issuance in the post-GFC pe- 
riods suggests a strengthening of this expectation from our 
theory’s point of view. 
The left-hand side of Fig. 7 shows the evolution of the 
dollar exchange rate against the euro, Japanese yen, and 
31 Although we illustrate this only for 5y-6m, it is qualitatively simi- 
lar for other horizons, such as 1y-6m, 2y-6m, 10y-6m, 2y-1y, 5y-1y, and 
10y-1y. 
586 

===== PAGE 17 =====

E. Eren and S. Malamud Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 571–589 
Table 5 
US-Germany yield-curve slope differential and the share of dollar debt. 
Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ denote signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, 
respectively. Debt-issuance data includes all sectors except the government. Dif f US,DE 
r 2 ,r 1 ,t measures the difference 
between the US and Germany of the difference between the non-annualized interest rate over r 2 months and 
the non-annualized interest rate over r 1 months: (r 2 (US) −r 1 (US)) − (r 2 (DE) −r 1 (DE)) . The sample period is 
1999Q1-2019Q4. Each column shows the coeﬃcient on Dif f US,DE 
r 2 ,r 1 ,t of the regression of USD shr 
t on Dif f US,DE 
r 2 ,r 1 ,t , for 
different values of r 1 , r 2 , and controls. Controls include a time trend and total international debt issuance 
excluding issuance by governments in a given quarter. 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
Dep. Var: USD shr 
t USD shr 
t USD shr 
t USD shr 
t USD shr 
t USD shr 
t USD shr 
t 
Indep. Var: Dif f US,DE 
12 , 6 ,t Dif f US,DE 
24 , 6 ,t Dif f US,DE 
60 , 6 ,t Dif f US,DE 
120 , 6 ,t Dif f US,DE 
24 , 12 ,t Dif f US,DE 
60 , 12 ,t Dif f US,DE 
120 , 12 ,t 
2.539 ∗∗∗ 1.016 ∗∗∗ 0.515 ∗∗∗ 0.279 ∗∗∗ 1.633 ∗∗∗ 0.612 ∗∗∗ 0.303 ∗∗∗
(0.873) (0.297) (0.119) (0.0637) (0.447) (0.134) (0.0673) 
Controls X X X X X X X 
Observations 84 84 84 84 84 84 84 
R-squared 0.618 0.629 0.656 0.664 0.635 0.661 0.666 
Fig. 7. The dollar and inﬂation risk premia during the COVID-19 crisis. Sources: Datastream, Hördahl and Tristani (2014) , authors’ calculations. 
the Swiss franc. Unlike previous episodes of global shocks, 
the dollar depreciated against these currencies without a 
meaningful initial appreciation. Moreover, this depreciation 
has been material to the order of around 10% against the 
euro. This ﬁnding highlights that the dollar’s depreciation 
provided a hedge for ﬁrms during the COVID-19 downturn, 
with dollar debt providing support for our theory. 
The channel that runs in our theory to explain the 
dollar’s dominance emphasizes the role played by the 
response of the monetary policy to shocks. During the 
COVID-19 crisis, the Federal Reserve reacted swiftly and 
forcefully to respond to the shock by reactivating a num- 
ber of crisis-response tools used in the GFC as well 
as introducing new ones, all contributing to the decline 
of the dollar against major currencies, reinforcing in- 
vestors’ expectations about the ability of the US mone- 
tary policy of alleviating the debt burden of ﬁrms in bad 
times. 
Our paper’s ﬁndings might also shed light on the future 
of the dollar’s dominance in denominating debt. Our the- 
ory suggests the continuing divergence between the dollar 
and euro inﬂation risk premia during the COVID-19 crisis 
(see the right-hand panel of Fig. 7 ) will further strengthen 
the dollar’s international role in denominating debt con- 
tracts, consistent with Proposition 3 . 
We provide preliminary evidence that ﬁrms are more 
likely to issue dollar debt after the COVID-19 crisis using 
granular bond-issuance data. We control for several factors 
to account for whether the same ﬁrms’ propensity to is- 
sue dollar debt is higher after the COVID-19 crisis com- 
pared with other major currencies. We restrict the sam- 
ple to bond issuance in ﬁve currencies: the dollar, the 
euro, the yen, the Swiss franc, and the pound, only in 
2019 and 2020 (data retrieved from Dealogic in October 
2020). We also divide the sample into pre- and post-COVID 
from April 1, 2020, which leaves us with 5099 observa- 
tions for banks, 4268 of which are pre-COVID and 831 are 
post-COVID; 25,042 observations for non-bank ﬁnancials, 
18,786 of which are pre-COVID and 6256 of which are 
post-COVID; and 6640 observations for non-ﬁnancial cor- 
porations, 4136 of which are pre-COVID and 2508 of which 
are post-COVID. 
We run a regression of whether the bond is issued in 
dollars or other four currencies ( 1 (USD ) ), on a dummy, 
1 (Post _ COV ID ) , which indicates whether the issue date is 
after April 1, 2020 as well as other control variables, such 
587 

===== PAGE 18 =====

E. Eren and S. Malamud Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 571–589 
Table 6 
Debt-issuance and debt-currency choice: Pre- and post-COVID period. 
Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ∗, ∗∗, and ∗∗∗ denote signiﬁ- 
cance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. The sample in columns 
(1), (2), and (3) is restricted to issuance in ﬁve currencies, USD, EUR, 
JPY, CHF, and GBP, in 2019 and 2020 (data retrieved in October 2020 
from Dealogic). 1 (USD ) is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if 
the currency of the issued bond is the dollar. 1 (Post _ COV ID ) is a dummy 
that is 1 if the issue date is after April 1, 2020. Controls include the win- 
sorized maturity at 5%, the size of the issuance, and a dummy variable 
for the investment-grade status of the bond. All columns include a ﬁrm 
ﬁxed effect. B ref ers to the sam ple of banks, NBF I refers to the sample 
of non-bank ﬁnancials, and NF C refers to the sample of non-ﬁnancial 
corporations. Column (4) includes all these sectors. The † in column (4) 
means observations are limited to dollar and euro issuance by ﬁrms out- 
side the US and the euro area. 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
Sample: B NBFI NFC Full † 
1 (USD ) 1 (USD ) 1 (USD ) 1 (USD ) 
1 (Post _ COV ID ) 0.0269 ∗∗ 0.00772 ∗∗ 0.0250 ∗∗∗ 0.0325 ∗∗∗
(0.0122) (0.00375) (0.00841) (0.0121) 
Controls X X X X 
Firm FE X X X X 
Observations 4978 24,506 5866 6472 
R-squared 0.751 0.924 0.875 0.666 
as the size of issuance, maturity, whether it is investment 
grade or not, and ﬁnally ﬁrm ﬁxed effects. We present the 
results in Table 6 . The three columns show the results for 
banks, non-bank ﬁnancials, and non-ﬁnancial corporations, 
respectively. The fourth column only focuses on the dollar 
and euro issuance by ﬁrms outside the US and the euro 
area for the full sample of banks, non-bank ﬁnancials, and 
non-ﬁnancial corporations. 32 All columns suggest that all 
else being constant, ﬁrms have tended to issue more dol- 
lar debt than other-major-currency debt since April 2020. 
8. Conclusion and policy implications 
Motivated by two facts, namely, the dollar’s dominant 
international role in debt markets and the fall and the sub- 
sequent rise of the dollar in these markets over the last 
two decades, we address two questions. First, of all the 
major international currencies, why is the dollar the dom- 
inant currency? Second, what explains the fall and rise of 
the dollar? 
We propose a “debt view” to explain the dollar’s dom- 
inant international role and provide broad empirical sup- 
port for it. We develop a simple capital-structure model in 
which ﬁrms optimally choose the currency composition of 
their debt. Independent of the lenders’ stochastic discount 
factor, borrowers behave as if they have a “CAPM discount 
factor,” whereby the debt-currency choice of borrowers de- 
pends on how each currency co-moves with the ﬁrm’s 
stock value. In this sense, borrowers prefer debt issuance 
in the riskiest of international currencies. Both forward- 
looking and historical covariances suggest the dollar ﬁts 
this description better than all major currencies, especially 
32 Dividing the fourth column into different samples of the three sec- 
tors yields qualitatively similar results, but not statistically signiﬁcant for 
non-bank ﬁnancials and non-ﬁnancial corporations due to large standard 
errors in part because of relatively small sample sizes. 
for longer horizons. Moreover, the debt view can jointly 
explain the fall and the rise of the dollar in debt markets 
during the pre- and post-2008 and offer insights into the 
future of the dollar’s international role in the aftermath of 
the COVID-19 crisis. 
The debt view is borrower driven, in contrast to the 
conventional view, which is investor driven. The debt view 
can account for why ﬁrms issue in dollars despite the dol- 
lar not being the “safest” currency. It can also account for 
why the dollar has higher nominal interest rates and why 
the dollar’s international role was cemented following its 
depreciation against major currencies in the 1970s after 
Bretton Woods. Moreover, once ﬁrms prefer to issue dol- 
lar debt, partially explaining the dollar’s role in the rest of 
the international monetary and ﬁnancial system might be 
possible, for example, why ﬁrms with dollar debt would 
prefer to invoice trade in dollars, or why a central bank 
would accumulate dollar reserves, among others. However, 
we leave this broader analysis of the dollar’s international 
role to future work. 
Our results have some policy implications. First, a com- 
mon belief is that an exchange-rate depreciation could 
help an economy in downturns, mainly through its effect 
on the terms of trade. Our results imply exchange-rate de- 
preciation could also help an economy by reducing the 
probability of default of indebted ﬁrms. Second, our results 
imply that if a country wishes to gain a dominant cur- 
rency status for debt issuance, that country’s currency can- 
not be the “safest haven” currency and should be riskier 
than its counterparts. Moreover, an essential role for the 
central bank arises, which is not to have realized inﬂation 
undershoot inﬂation expectations in downturns, generat- 
ing appreciation pressures for the currency. To that end, 
if the European Union wishes to enhance the role of the 
euro as a dominant international currency, the debt view 
would suggest this scenario could be possible if inﬂation 
were more countercyclical. 
What do our results imply for the future of the dollar? 
Many explanations of the dollar’s dominant role in the in- 
ternational monetary system feature arguments such as in- 
ertia, size, network externalities, and market liquidity. All 
these arguments suggest changes in the dominance status 
of a currency occur slowly. By contrast, our results indi- 
cate the dollar can lose its dominance if the expectations 
about the risk properties of the dollar and other curren- 
cies change. Because this dominance relies on the beliefs 
of market participants, changes might occur abruptly. Our 
evidence from quarterly regressions suggests this channel 
is relevant. 
This paper ﬁts into a broader research agenda that aims 
to study the use of various currencies in different parts of 
the economy through the lens of their risk properties. Our 
model can be extended in multiple directions. First, ad- 
dressing the interactions between the dollar’s role in trade, 
banking, and ﬁnance may shed important light on how 
debt issued in a dominant currency could affect other parts 
of the economy through the lens of the debt view. Sec- 
ond, modeling the demand for safe assets would help us 
understand the role of the dollar for ﬁnancial intermedia- 
tion and household balance sheets and ﬁrms issuing debt 
jointly. We leave these questions for future research. 
588 

===== PAGE 19 =====

E. Eren and S. Malamud Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 571–589 
References 
Admati, A.R. , Demarzo, P.M. , Hellwig, M.F. , Pﬂeiderer, P. , 2018. The lever- 
age ratchet effect. J. Finance 73, 145–198 . 
Aldasoro, I. , Ehlers, T. , Eren, E. , 2019. Global banks, dollar funding and reg- 
ulation. BIS Working Paper. (708) . 
Baele, L. , Bekaert, G. , Inghelbrecht, K. , 2007. The determinants of stock and 
bond return comovements. Working Paper Research. National Bank of 
Belgium . number 119 
Bahaj, S. , Reis, R. , 2020. Central bank swap lines: evidence on the effects 
of the lender of last resort. Technical Report. LSE . 
Bahaj, S. , Reis, R. , 2020. Jumpstarting an international currency. Technical 
Report. LSE . 
Baskaya, Y.S. , di Giovanni, J. , Kalemli-Ozcan, S. , Ulu, M.F. , 2017. Interna- 
tional spillovers and local credit cycles. Working Paper. NBER . number 
23149 
Bocola, L. , Lorenzoni, G. , 2020. Financial crises, dollarization and lending 
of last resort in open economies. Am. Econ. Rev. 110, 2524–2557 . 
Bodnár, K. , 2006. Survey evidence on the exchange rate exposure of hun- 
garian smes. MNB Bull. 1 (1), 6–12 . 
Bruno, V. , Kim, S.-J. , Shin, H.S. , 2018. Exchange rates and the working cap- 
ital channel of trade ﬂuctuations. Working Paper. BIS . 
Bruno, V. , Shin, H.S. , 2017. Global dollar credit and carry trades: a ﬁr- 
m-level analysis. Rev. Financ. Stud. 30 (3), 703–749 . 
Caballero, R.J. , Farhi, E. , Gourinchas, P.O. , 2008. An equilibrium model 
of global imbalances and low interest rates. Am. Econ. Rev. 98 (1), 
358–393 . 
Caballero, R.J. , Farhi, E. , Gourinchas, P.-O. , 2015. Global imbalances and 
currency wars at the ZLB. Working Paper . 
Caballero, R.J. , Farhi, E. , Gourinchas, P.-O. , 2017. The safe assets shortage 
conundrum. J. Econ. Perspect. . 
Caballero, R.J. , Krishnamurthy, A. , 2002. Excessive dollar debt: ﬁnancial 
development and underinsurance. J. Finance 58 (2), 867–893 . 
Caballero, R.J. , Krishnamurthy, A. , 2009. Global imbalances and ﬁnancial 
fragility. Am. Econ. Rev. 99 (2), 584–588 . 
Campbell, J., Pﬂueger, C. E., Viceira, L., Macroeconomic Drivers of Bond 
and Equity Risks. J. Politic. Econ.. forthcoming. 
Casas, C. , Díez, F. , Gopinath, G. , Gourinchas, P.-O. , 2017. Dominant currency 
paradigm. Technical Report. BIS . 
CGFS , 2020. US dollar funding: an international perspective. Technical Re- 
port. Committee on the Global Financial System . 
Chahrour, R. , Valchev, R. , 2017. International medium of exchange: privi- 
lege and duty. Technical Report. Boston College . 
Chernov, M., Creal, D., The PppView of Multihorizon Currency Risk Premi- 
ums. Rev. Financ. Stud.. forthcoming. 
Choi, J. , Hackbarth, D. , Zechner, J. , 2018. Corporate debt maturity proﬁles. 
J. Financ. Econ. . 
Chowdhry, B. , Roll, R. , Xia, Y. , 2005. Extracting inﬂation from stock returns 
to test purchasing power parity. Am. Econ. Rev. 95 (1), 255–276 . 
Cœuré, B. , 2019. The euro’s global role in a changing world: a monetary 
policy perspective. speech at the Council on Foreign Relations, NYC . 
Cortina, J.J. , Didier, T. , Schmukler, S. , 2018. Corporate debt maturity in de- 
veloping countries: sources of long and short-termism. World Econ. 
Special Issue, 1–29 . 
Devereux, M.B. , Shi, S. ,2 0 1 3 . Vehicle currency. Int. Econ. Rev. (Philadel- 
phia) 54 (1), 97–133 . 
Drenik, A. , Kirpalani, R. , Perez, D. , 2019. Currency Choice in Contracts. 
Technical Report. NYU . 
Du, W. , Schreger, J. , 2017. Sovereign risk, currency risk and corporate bal- 
ance sheets. Technical Report. Federal Reserve Board . 
ECB , 2017. The international role of the euro. Technical Report. ECB . 
Engel, C. , 2016. Exchange rates, interest rates and the risk premium. Am. 
Econ. Rev. 106, 436–474 . 
Eren, E. , Malamud, S. , 2019. Dominant currency debt. BIS working papers, 
no. 783 . 
Farhi, E. , Maggiori, M. , 2018. A model of the international monetary sys- 
tem. Q. J. Econ. 133 (1), 295–355 . 
Fisher, I. , 1933. The debt-deﬂation theory of great depressions. Economet- 
rica 1 (4), 337 . 
Froot, K.A. , Scharfstein, D.S. , Stein, J.C. , 1993. Risk management: coordi- 
nating corporate investment and ﬁnancing policies. J. Finance 48 (5), 
1629–1658 . 
Giovanni, J.d., Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Ulu, M.F., Baskaya, Y.S., 2017. Interna- 
tional spillovers and local credit cycles. Working Paper. National Bu- 
reau of Economic Research doi: 10.3386/w23149 . number 23149 
Goldberg, L. , Tille, C. , 2008. Vehicle currency use in international trade. J. 
Int. Econ. 76(2) (2), 177–192 . 
Gomes, J. , Jermann, U. , Schmid, L. , 2016. Sticky leverage. Am. Econ. Rev. 
106 (12), 3800–3828 . 
Gopinath, G. , 2015. International price system. paper prepared for the 
Jackson Hole Symposium . 
Gopinath, G., Stein, J. C., Banking, Trade and the Making of a Dominant 
Currency. Q. J. Econ.. forthcoming. 
Gourinchas, P. O., 2019. The dollar hegemon? Evidence and implications 
for policymakers. 
Gourinchas, P.-O. , Govillot, N. , Rey, H. , 2017. Exorbitant privilege and exor- 
bitant duty. Mimeo UC Berkeley . 
Gourinchas, P.-O. , Rey, H. , Sauzet, M. , 2019. The international monetary 
and ﬁnancial system. Annu. Rev. Econom. 11 . 
He, Z. , Krishnamurthy, A. , Milbradt, K. , 2019. A model of safe asset deter- 
mination. Am. Econ. Rev. 109 (4), 1230–1262 . 
Hördahl, P. , Tristani, O. , 2014. Inﬂation risk premia in the euro area and 
the united states. Int. J. Central Bank. 10, 1–47 . 
Hugonnier, J. , Malamud, S. , Morellec, E. , 2015. Capital supply uncertainty, 
cash holdings and investment,. Rev. Financ. Stud. 28 (2), 391–445 . 
Ilzetzki, E., Reinhart, C.M., Rogoff, K.S., 2019. Exchange arrangements en- 
tering the twenty-First century: which anchor will hold? ∗. Q. J. Econ. 
134 (2), 599–646. doi: 10.1093/qje/qjy033 . http://oup.prod.sis.lan/qje/ 
article-pdf/134/2/599/29986363/qjy033.pdf 
Imbs, J. , Mumtaz, H. , Ravn, M. , Rey, H. , 2005. Ppp strikes back: aggregation 
and the real exchange rate. Q. J. Econ. 120 (1), 1–43 . 
Ivashina, V. , Scharfstein, D.S. , Stein, J.C. , 2015. Dollar funding and the lend- 
ing behavior of global banks. Q. J. Econ. 130 (3), 1241–1281 . 
Jiang, Z. , Krishnamurthy, A. , Lustig, H. , 2018. Dollar safety and the global 
ﬁnancial cycle. Technical Report. Stanford GSB . 
Jiang, Z., Krishnamurthy, A., Lustig, H. N., Foreign Safe Asset Demand and 
the Dollar Exchange Rate. J. Finance. forthcoming 
Kalemli-Ozcan, S. , Liu, X. , Shim, I. , 2018. Exchange rate appreciations and 
corporate risk taking. Technical Report. BIS . number 710 
Korteweg, A. , Schwert, M. , Strebulaev, I.A. ,2 0 1 8 . How often do ﬁrms re- 
balance their capital structures? Evidence from corporate ﬁlings. Stan- 
ford GSB Working Paper . 
Kremens, L. , Martin, I.W. , 2019. The quanto theory of exchange rates. Am. 
Econ. Rev. 109 (3), 810–843 . 
Liao, G.Y. , 2020. Credit migration and covered interest rate parity. J. Fi- 
nanc. Econ. 138 (2), 504–525 . 
Maggiori, M. , 2017. Financial intermediation, international risk sharing 
and reserve currencies. Am. Econ. Rev. 107 (10), 3038–3071 . 
Maggiori, M. , Neiman, B. , Schreger, J. , 2019. International currencies and 
capital allocation. J. Politic. Econ. 128 (6) . 
Matsuyama, K. , Kiyotaki, N. , Matsui, A. , 1993. Toward a theory of interna- 
tional currency. Rev. Econ. Stud. 60 (2), 283–307 . 
Melitz, M.J. , 2003. The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and 
aggregate industry productivity. Econometrica 71 (6), 1695–1725 . 
Mukhin, D. , 2018. An eqilibrium model of the international price system. 
Technical Report. University of Wisconsin-Madison . 
Myers, S.C. , 1977. Determinants of corporate borrowing. J. Financ. Econ. 5, 
147–175 . 
Niepmann, F. , Schmidt-Eisenlohr, T. , 2019. Foreign currency loans and 
credit risk: evidence from U.S. banks. Technical Report. Federal Re- 
serve Board . 
Nikolov, B. , Schmid, L. , Steri, R. ,2 0 1 8 . The sources of ﬁnancing constraints. 
Technical Report . Working Paper 
Praet, P., 2016. The ecb’s ﬁght against low inﬂation: reasons and conse- 
quences. 
Rampini, A. , Suﬁ, A. , Viswanathan, S. , 2014. Dynamic risk management. J. 
Financ. Econ. 111, 271–296 . 
Rey, H. , 2001. International trade and currency exchange. Rev. Econ. Stud. 
68 (2), 443–464 . 
Salomao, J. , Varela, L. , 2020. Exchange rate exposure and ﬁrm dynamics. 
Working paper. University of Minnesota . 
Shin, H.S. , 2012. Global banking glut and loan risk premium. IMF Econ. 
Rev. 60, 155–192 . 
Valchev, R. , 2015. Exchange rates and UIP violations at short and long 
horizons. 2015 Meeting Papers. Society for Economic Dynamics . num- 
ber 1446 
Velandia, A. , Cabral, R. , 2017. Why Are More Sovereigns Issuing in Eu- 
ros? Choosing between Usd and Eur-denominated Bonds. World Bank 
Group . 
589 