

===== PAGE 1 =====

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND DECENTRALIZED FINANCE (DEFI)
Igor Makarov
Antoinette Schoar
Working Paper 30006
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30006
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2022
Igor Makarov: Houghton Street, London WC2A 2AE, UK. Email: i.makarov@lse.ac.uk. 
Antoinette Schoar: 62-638, 100 Main Street, Cambridge MA 02138, USA. Email: 
aschoar@mit.edu. This paper was originally presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic 
Activity Conference on March 24,  2022. We thank the editor Janice Eberly, and our discussants 
Gary Gorton and Eswar Prasad for extensive  comments that improved the paper. We thank 
Daniel Ferreira for helpful comments. We also thank Jiageng Liu, Yuou Wu, and Xin Xiong for 
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein  are those of the authors and do not 
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been 
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies 
official 
NBER publications.
© 2022 by Igor Makarov and Antoinette Schoar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to 
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, 
including © notice, 
is given to the source.

===== PAGE 2 =====

Cryptocurrencies and Decentralized Finance (DeFi)
Igor Makarov and Antoinette Schoar
NBER Working Paper No. 30006
April 2022
JEL No. G1,G2,G20,G21,G23,G3
ABSTRACT
The paper provides an overview of cryptocurrencies and decentralized finance. The discussion 
lays out potential benefits and challenges of the new system and presents a comparison to the 
traditional system of financial intermediation. Our analysis highlights that while the DeFi 
architecture might have the potential to reduce transaction costs, similar to the traditional 
financial system, there are several  layers where rents can accumulate due to endogenous 
constraints to competition. We show that the permissionless and pseudonymous design of DeFi 
generates challenges for enforcing tax compliance,  anti-money laundering laws, and preventing 
financial malfeasance. We highlight ways to regulate  the DeFi system which would preserve a 
majority of benefits of the underlying blockchain architecture  but support accountability and 
regulatory compliance.
Igor Makarov
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UK
i.makarov@lse.ac.uk
Antoinette Schoar
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-638
Cambridge, MA  02142
and NBER
aschoar@mit.edu

===== PAGE 3 =====

The ﬁnancial system performs a wide array of functions that are important for eco-
nomic growth and stability, such as allocating resources to their most productive use,
moving capital from agents with surpluses to those with deﬁcits, and providing eﬃcient
means for moving wealth across time and states, see for exampleMerton (1995) or Allen
et al. (2019). To achieve these goals, the US ﬁnancial system, and similarly most other
countries, have traditionally relied on a set of intermediaries such as banks, brokers,
exchanges etc. that are connected by payment systems. These intermediaries serve as
centralized nodes that guard the access to the ﬁnancial system and provide customers
with essential services such as record keeping, veriﬁcation of transactions, settlement,
liquidity, and security. This architecture implies that intermediaries perform many of
the core functions in the system, and also help with the implementation of regulatory
goals such as tax reporting, anti-money-laundering laws or consumer ﬁnancial protec-
tion. As a result, however, these intermediaries can hold signiﬁcant power, based on
their preferential access to customers and data. This centralized position, if not prop-
erly harnessed and regulated, can be a source of outsized economic rents and can lead
to considerable ineﬃciencies. It can also lead to inherent fragility and systematic risk
if core intermediaries become corrupted or investors lose trust in the system.
The concern about the power and potential corruptibility or fragility of intermedi-
aries, possibly heightened by the experience of the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis, has contributed
to the new “revolution” brought about by the blockchain technology, which is one of
the fastest growing ﬁnancial innovations over the last decade. Its attraction lies in the
ability to build decentralized and open access platforms that reduce the reliance on
centralized trusted intermediaries and middlemen.
Eliminating unnecessary intermediaries can potentially be a signiﬁcant beneﬁt of
the blockchain architecture. Technological innovations have, of course, long been con-
sequential in improving the eﬃciency of the ﬁnancial system or strengthening compe-
tition. We can think of innovations like mobile banking or algorithmic lending. What
diﬀerentiates the blockchain from past technological innovations is that it oﬀers the
possibility of a completely diﬀerent ﬁnancial architecture, commonly called decentral-
ized ﬁnance (DeFi), where record keeping is decentralized, access to the system is
anonymous and unrestricted, and any form of intermediation would be built on top of
it.1
To assess the potential beneﬁts and challenges of the proposed new architecture, it
is important to recognize that intermediaries are not merely gate keepers which have no
economic value except for rent extraction. Many problems with existing intermediaries
1DeFi is also distinct from the generic umbrella term of “Fintech”. While Fintech innovations
also introduce new technologies to ﬁnancial services, for example Rocket Mortgage which uses on-line
origination in mortgage lending, they still rely on a model of centralized intermediaries.
1

===== PAGE 4 =====

originate from the economic forces that are an inherent part of ﬁnancial markets and
therefore, equally exist in DeFi solutions, but might be relocated to diﬀerent layers in
the new infrastructure as we will discuss. In addition, some of the rents that ﬁnancial
institutions enjoy in the current ﬁnancial system, are a deliberate regulatory choice: In
order to provide institutions with the incentives to abide by regulations, rule-makers
allow these institutions to earn some rents to ensure that they have a franchise value.
Advocates of DeFi solutions argue that ﬁnancial services are ripe to undergo dra-
matic and disruptive changes. How this evolves, in terms of technology, regulation,
and ultimately liquidity and credit to the economy, has important consequences for
the US and global economies. There are also strategic and competitive implications
across countries. The goal of this paper is to raise some of the issues that arise in a
system of Decentralized Finance and propose some solutions, while at the same time
providing an introduction to how such a system works and the mechanics behind it.
We start by laying out how the blockchain technology works that underpins vir-
tually all DeFi solutions. We discuss the diﬀerent ways security is achieved under
diﬀerent protocols, in particular Proof of Work (PoW) and Proof of Stake (PoS), and
what economic incentives are built into these solutions to ensure the integrity of the
blockchain ledger. Our analysis highlights that the current security protocols have
in-built economic incentives for concentration of mining or validator capacity due to
inherent ﬁxed costs and beneﬁts of co-insurance for validators. We also show that
large PoW networks can have negative externalities on the security of smaller PoW
networks that has important implication for the competitiveness of PoW protocols.
For PoS platforms, an added complexity arises from the fact that the going concern
value of the platform also aﬀects the security of the platform itself and applications
that run on it.
Next, we discuss the beneﬁts and limitations of smart contracts. These are self-
executing pieces of scripting code that can in theory carry out any computation and
are the building blocks of many DeFi applications. Since smart contracts are designed
not to have recourse to the legal system, they have to be written as complete contracts
upfront. We highlight the implication of such a change in the enforcement of contracts
on the transaction costs of writing contracts, the opportunity of opting out of current
remedial laws, and challenges for consumer ﬁnancial protection if smart contracts are
written outside typical legal protections. Many of these challenges might give rise to
a new layer of “trusted” intermediaries, in particular coders who will help people to
navigate the DeFi infrastructure that might be too complicated for individual par-
ticipants. In this context, we explain the role and design of Oracles, which provide
access to data from outside the blockchain and allow smart contracts to interact with
2

===== PAGE 5 =====

the real world. Based on these building blocks we then provide an overview of the
current crypto landscape and the main DeFi applications such as decentralized crypto
exchanges, borrowing and lending markets, and yield farming.
Finally, we compare this new DeFi architecture to traditional ﬁnancial market so-
lutions and lay out how these two regimes solve some of the most important problems
in ﬁnancial systems, such as data privacy and transparency, extraction of rents, trans-
actions costs, governance issues and systemic risk. 2
DeFi applications might have the potential to democratize ﬁnance by creating a level
playing ﬁeld among providers of ﬁnancial products and services. But we show that the
current design of DeFi applications, which are predominantly built on permissionless
and pseudonymous blockchains generates formidable challenges for tax enforcement,
aggravates issues of money laundering and other kinds of ﬁnancial malfeasance, and
as a result creates negative externalities on the rest of the economy. Similar to the
traditional ﬁnancial system, there are several natural points where rents can accumulate
at diﬀerent layers in the DeFi architecture due to endogenous constraints to competition
caused by network externalities and economies of scale. Also, rent extraction can
be driven by frictions at the customer level due to lack of ﬁnancial sophistication or
behavioral biases. In cases where market competition does not work to restrict excessive
rents, typically regulations are used to protect the interest of users. But here again
the permissionless and pseudonymous design, severely limits the ability of regulators
to restrict unscrupulous operators.
The pseudonymous and permissionless structure also has implications for the gov-
ernance of DeFi apps. Many DeFi apps in their quest to avoid placing trust in any
actor or institution have experimented with new organizational forms, so-called decen-
tralized autonomous organization (DAO). The basic idea of DAO is to spread control
over decisions among all interested stakeholders by issuing special “governance” tokens
that give their holders the power to propose changes to the protocol and vote on them.
We discuss the governance challenges that arise in such arrangements, and show that
they face the same fundamental governance issues as traditional organizations. As a
result, we show that in the majority of crypto projects ownership is concentrated.
Lastly, we discuss the potential of DeFi solutions to contribute to systemic risk and
have spillover eﬀects on the rest of the economy. We highlight that DeFi so far has
operated under a narrow banking model. This removes many of the problems faced by
the fractional reserve system, but also constrains the eﬃcient use of capital. Presently,
the main systemic risk comes from the ability of investors to take highly leveraged and
2Harvey et al. (2021), Sch¨ ar(2021), Aramonte et al. (2021) also provide detailed discussions of the
DeFi eco-system and its applications.
3

===== PAGE 6 =====

interconnected positions and a potential run on stablecoins. So far, the systemic risk
has been limited, but as ties between the regular ﬁnancial system and DeFi increase
the risk can grow.
We conclude by discussing challenges and potential solutions for regulators and
market participants in this new infrastructure. A natural place for regulatory oversight
in this new ecosystem is at the level of developers and validators, which in turn control
the network protocol. Once this level of regulatory compliance is established, many
other functions can be built that would address the majority of issues we outlined above.
This solution looks similar to a permissioned blockchain, but it preserves most of the
desired properties of the blockchain such as observability of transactions, automatic
settlement, and execution of the same set of smart contracts.
If regulators give up on the ability to oversee validators, the eﬀectiveness of reg-
ulation will be much more limited and will depend on the goodwill and voluntary
cooperation of validators and developers of the blockchain. If validators accept trans-
actions from every party, the most regulators could hope for is to separate the network
into “regulated” and “unregulated” parts. The latter part could then harbor bad actors
and facilitate illegal activities. The opportunities of sidestepping the regulated part
will generally increase with the level of crypto-adoption, since people will be able to
predominately transact in the unregulated part and avoid triggering regulatory over-
sight.
1. Blockchain technology
A typical ﬁnancial system can be represented, at an abstract level, as a collection
of states and transactions that describe the transition from one state to another. For
example, in a payment system a state is a collection of all the accounts in the system
together with their balances. Transactions specify how funds move between accounts.
Historically, ﬁnancial intermediaries have been the key nodes in the ﬁnancial sys-
tem that control the accuracy of customer accounts, perform bookkeeping functions
and ensure that unauthorized persons do not have access to an account. For a long
time, this centralized model of bookkeeping was the only viable option. But recent ad-
vances in technology have enabled an alternative architecture of storing and managing
information where no single entity has full control over all the states and transactions,
or any subset of them. Instead, multiple parties (validators) hold their own copies of
states and jointly decide which transactions are admissible. This architecture became
known as Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT). A blockchain is a form of DLT, in
which all transactions are recorded and organized in blocks that are linked together
4

===== PAGE 7 =====

using cryptography. Bitcoin was the ﬁrst and remains the most famous application of
the blockchain technology.
One of the main advantages of DLT is the elimination of a central point of failure.
Since multiple copies of records exist, the corruption of a single node or a single copy
has no eﬀect on the security of the blockchain. In fact, the blockchain protocol allows
for multiple points of failure or corruption as long as the majority of validators are
not corrupted. In particular, it allows validators to be parties that do not trust one
another or are even adversaries.
Blockchains are usually divided into permissioned and permissionless ledgers de-
pending on the set of entities that are allowed to be validators. In a permissioned
blockchain, a set of validators is approved by a coordinating body, which can be a
private ﬁrm or a consortium of institutions. In contrast, a permissionless blockchain
does not impose ex ante constraints on the number or identity of validators. In addi-
tion, blockchains are sometimes categorized as private or public ledgers. In a public
blockchain, everyone has full access to the information stored on the blockchain. In
contrast, only authorized parties can observe transactions in private blockchains. Typ-
ically, permissioned blockchains are private, and permissionless blockchains are public.
Permissioned blockchains still require trust in the coordinating body that approves
validators, which is viewed by many crypto enthusiasts as a fundamental ﬂaw. In
contrast, permissionless blockchains do not rely on trust in any individual validator,
forming what famously has been called a “trustless” trust architecture. The “trustless”
trust, however, comes at a high cost. Since anyone can become a validator in a per-
missionless blockchain, the system is potentially vulnerable to a Sybil attack where an
adversary subverts the system by creating a large number of pseudonymous validators
and uses them to gain disproportionately large inﬂuence over the consensus protocol.
Two main approaches have been proposed for permissionless protocols to be resilient
to a Sybil attack, (1) Proof-of-Work (PoW) and (2) Proof-of-Stake (PoS). The main
idea behind both approaches for validating transactions is to provide validators with
a reward for their services and to make it costly for an adversary to attain a majority
stake and subvert the system. The reward is meant to provide validators with ﬁnancial
incentives to work honestly. The reward usually comes in two forms: transaction fees
and a pre-speciﬁed amount also known as a block reward. The block reward is typically
denominated in the platform’s native currency and is ﬁnanced through issuance of new
coins, thus serving as a dilution tax on all users.
The decentralization of the ledger also has implications for the scalability of the
network. Intuitively, as the ledger becomes more decentralized more copies need to be
distributed and more resources need to be spent to achieve the protocol consensus and
5

===== PAGE 8 =====

make the blockchain secure. This trade-oﬀ between decentralization, security, and scal-
ability was famously formulated by Vitalik Buterin, a co-founder of Ethereum, in the
early days of Ethereum and became known as the scalability trilemma (or sometimes
as the blockchain trilemma). The trilemma has attracted a lot of attention and a large
number of new blockchain solutions have being introduced to achieve simultaneously
the three goals. 3
In the following, we leave aside the technical issues such as scalability. We also
refrain from a game-theoretic analysis of security of diﬀerent protocols. For an example
of such analysis see Biais et al. (2019) and Halaburda et al. (2021). Instead we focus on
the embedded economic mechanisms and incentives that are at the heart of the diﬀerent
protocol security approaches. Since most DeFi applications are currently built on
permissionless blockchains we will focus predominantly on these blockchains. We show
that both PoW and PoS favor validator concentration, since there are strong implicit
incentives for validators to pool their capacity and co-insure their risk of winning a block
reward. We also discuss the resilience of PoW and PoS to an attack and show that
large existing networks have negative externality on small networks. These properties
have important implications for competition in the crypto space which we discuss in
Section 4.
1.1. PoW protocols
In a PoW protocol such as Bitcoin, validators (also known as miners) compete for
the right to verify transactions and obtain their reward by solving a computationally
intensive problem. For a successful attack on a blockchain an attacker needs to control
a large fraction of the total network power, typically 51%, which resulted in the nick-
name “51% attack”. Once an attacker controls the majority of mining power they can
alter transactions in the system, for example, they can spend the same cryptocurrency
multiple times (known as a double-spending attack).
The likelihood of an attack in a PoW protocol, therefore, depends on the prospects
that a malevolent party amasses enough computing power. Notice that miners should
at least break even in the long-run to be willing to invest in mining. Therefore, the
expected rewards collected for mining a block should cover the cost of its mining. This
implies that there are no economic disincentives of amassing 51% and the constraint is
on the feasibility of amassing 51% of hashing power, Budish (2018).4
3These include sharding, sidechains, and lightning networks. There are also non-blockchain solu-
tions, e.g., hashgraph technologies.
4Hashing power or hash rate is the primary measure of a miner’s performance in a PoW protocols.
See https://en.bitcoinwiki.org/wiki/Hashrate for more details.
6

===== PAGE 9 =====

Of course, any successful attack on a blockchain reduces trust in this blockchain,
and therefore, its economic value. If miners have to incur large ﬁxed costs to set up
their operations, then by attacking the blockchain they will forfeit some of the future
proﬁts and might not be able to recover their initial investments. This reduces the
beneﬁts of the attack and therefore, can make it unproﬁtable.
Therefore, the lower the ﬁxed costs, the less costly is a 51% attack. As a result,
any factors that reduce ﬁxed costs have negative eﬀects on the security of the network.
In particular, large PoW networks like Bitcoin or Ethereum have negative externalities
on the security of smaller PoW networks.
The large appreciation of Bitcoin and Ethereum led to signiﬁcant investments in
mining capacity. Smaller networks like Litecoin or Bitcoin Gold usually attract only a
small fraction of the mining capacity of these larger coins, since their rewards also are
much lower. This creates a possibility that a miner with a large hashing capacity can
divert a fraction of it to attack a smaller coin, if they chose to.
Furthermore, the emergence of market places like NiceHash, where mining hash
power can be rented for a speciﬁc time period, has made it possible for people to
speculate on mining proﬁtability without owning the physical hardware themselves
and amass hashing power for a possible attack. The amount of available hashing
power in these market places is only a small fraction of the capacity used in large
networks such as Bitcoin and Ethereum, which usually operate close to full capacity.
But the available capacity on NiceHash, often is signiﬁcantly larger than the total
mining capacity employed in smaller networks. 5 These renting opportunities have
signiﬁcantly reduced the cost of a 51% attack on smaller networks, and in fact have led
to many such attacks on smaller cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin SV (BSV), Bitcoin
Gold (BTG), and Ethereum Classic (ETC), see Table A.1 in the Appendix.
The negative externalities of large PoW networks on smaller networks has important
implications for the competitiveness of PoW protocols. It suggests that once one or
a few major PoW blockchains are in existence, new entrants might ﬁnd it diﬃcult
to compete. While the new protocol has not reached a critical mass yet, it has a
heightened likelihood of being subject to an attack. This makes it less less secure
and therefore, might reinforce the dominant position of the ﬁrst movers. One defense
against the negative externalities of hashing capacity in larger blockchains would be to
make mining equipment very platform speciﬁc, so that slack in a larger system does
not aﬀect the new entrant. However, platform speciﬁc mining hardware can increase
entry cost for miners to the new platform and therefore, can have negative eﬀect on its
5See, for example, the website Crypto51 https://www.crypto51.app/ that measures the cost to
51% attack Bitcoin and other major proof of work cryptocurrencies.
7

===== PAGE 10 =====

growth and security.
While there have not been any successful 51% attacks on Bitcoin or Ethereum, it
does not mean that they are completely safe from it. First, as we mentioned above,
these networks have beneﬁted so far from large price appreciation that have made
miners operate at nearly full capacity. If at some point there is a substantial price
decline it is likely that an increasing number of miners will ﬁnd it unproﬁtable to
continue their mining operations. This can lead to an increase in spare mining renting
capacity, and therefore, might increase the probability of an attack.
Second, the original design of Satoshi Nakamoto, the inventor of Bitcoin, envisioned
a world where mining would be fully decentralized and not depend on a few large
players. In this world, miners would ﬁnd it diﬃcult to collude and failure of any one
miner would have no consequence for the security of the network.
This original idea, however, clashes with the economics of mining in PoW proto-
cols. By design, the probability of winning the race and obtaining the block reward is
proportional to the computing power spent on mining. This gives strong incentives for
miners to pool their computing power and co-insure each other. As a result, mining in
most PoW blockchains is dominated by large mining pools, Cong et al. (2020), Ferreira
et al. (2019).
The concentration of mining pools has attracted a lot of public attention and con-
cern, since high concentration facilitates collusion among miners and with it the danger
of an attack. Even if miners themselves do not misbehave, high concentration increases
the risk that a malevolent party, either a private or a state actor, could hijack them
and gain control over the network.
Some observers downplayed the risk of the attack coming from pool concentration
arguing that even though pools can have substantial inﬂuence over the cryptocurrency
protocol, they do not necessarily control their miners. Therefore, if any pool is noticed
to engage in rogue behavior its miners can leave it and join other pools.
The power that a pool operator has vis a vis individual miners depends on the
ease with which miners can shift capacity across pools, which in turn depends on the
underlying size distribution of the miners. Makarov and Schoar (2021) document that
miner concentration in the Bitcoin protocol is high, even at the level of individual
miners. They show that at times fewer than 50 miners control 50% of mining capacity.
One explanation for this concentration in mining power seems to lie with the high ﬁxed
costs of setting up a large mining farm that result in increasing returns to scale.
The paper also shows that the concentration of mining capacity is counter cyclical
and varies with the Bitcoin price. It decreases following sharp increases in the Bitcoin
price and increases in periods when the price drops. Thus, the risk of a 51% attack
8

===== PAGE 11 =====

increases when the Bitcoin price drops and makes the system more fragile.
1.2. PoS protocols
While the costs of an attack and the resilience of a PoW network increase with
the size of the network so does the cost of veriﬁcation. According to the Cambridge
Bitcoin Electricity Consumption Index, the annual electricity consumption of the Bit-
coin network in 2021 reached 130TWh, which exceeds the annual consumption of such
countries as Norway or the Ukraine. Because miners have to be compensated for their
costs large electricity consumption translates into high transaction fees. Figure 1 shows
the average transaction fees in the two largest PoW protocols, Bitcoin and Ethereum.
As the Bitcoin and Ethereum prices have signiﬁcantly increased over time and so have
the fees.
[Fig. 1 About Here]
The serious concerns about the sustainability and energy consumption of PoW
protocols have favored the emergence of PoS blockchains. PoS protocols consume
signiﬁcantly fewer resources than PoW protocols. Platt et al. (2021) estimate energy
consumption of major PoS protocols and show that their energy consumption per
transaction is comparable to that in the Visa network. Recognizing the drawbacks of
PoW protocols, after 2017 there was a signiﬁcant acceleration in the development of
PoS blockchains Also, Ethereum instituted a shift to a PoS protocol, Ethereum 2.0
(Eth2), to be completed in 2022.
In a PoS protocol, instead of solving a diﬃcult mathematical problem a validator
stakes its coins, which can be forfeited if the validator fails to verify transactions in a
timely manner or its actions are determined to be malicious. In most PoS protocols,
participants who stake more coins are more likely to be chosen to verify transactions
(or have more rights to vote for a validator in delegated PoS networks). Thus, PoS
protocols are built on the idea that a party that has a large stake in the given network
would not want to undermine this network since the gains from an attack would not
compensate for the loss of value that comes from penalties and the drop in the network’s
valuation.
The above argument relies on the idea that a validator which owns a large stake
in the platform also has an interest in its continuation value and thus should be disin-
centivized from endangering it. This logic makes sense, if the attack in question is, for
example, a double-spending attack, since the gains in that case are a small fraction of
the total value of the network.
9

===== PAGE 12 =====

However, the gains from an attack might not be restricted to simple gains from
double-spending. First, if the network is part of a competitive environment, competing
networks might realize substantial gains from undermining a new entrant. Similarly to
what we described in PoW blockchains, here as well undermining ﬂedgling rivals can
be particularly proﬁtable if it reduces future competition.
Second, many PoS blockchains are smart contract platforms that position them-
selves as a base layer that provides security for other applications or even other
blockchains that are built on it. In this case, there is tension between the value of
the base layer blockchain and its applications. If the value of the base layer is below
the value of an application, an attacker who wants to undermine the application might
ﬁnd it proﬁtable to attack the base layer. To prevent such an attack the value of
the blockchain at the base layer should be substantially greater than the value of its
applications. Since the value of the base layer comes primarily from transaction fees
(and seignorage), the possibility of an attack on the base layer puts a lower bound on
the required size of the fees that have to accrue to the blockchain at the base layer.
High fees, however, hurt the value of applications built on the platform, and thus the
platform’s value.
We showed in Section 1.1 that mining in PoW blockchains is dominated by pools
because they allow miners to co-insure each other. A similar force is at play in PoS
blockchains. Since the probability of being chosen and collecting the reward depends
on the amount of coins a validator is staking, investors have incentives to pool their
stakes together and co-insure each other.
Table 1 documents concentration of validators for the largest PoS protocols as of
January 2022. The data shows signiﬁcant concentration for the vast majority of the
PoS blockchains. The top 10 validators hold typically more than 25% of the capacity,
while the top 50 validator are above 50%.
In addition, since the technology used across diﬀerent PoS protocols shares many
similarities the same validators typically work on multiple blockchains. Table 2 shows
the top 15 validators together with their combined stakes in the top 10 largest PoS
protocols. The top 10, 50, 100 validators account for 14%, 32%, and 41% of stakes
across the 10 largest PoS blockchains, respectively.
The concentration of PoS validators as of now is lower than in the PoW protocols,
but it is not fully dispersed either. It is of interest that a few validators are starting to
emerge as dominant players across diﬀerent blockchains.
10

===== PAGE 13 =====

2. Smart contracts
Smart contracts have become another fundamental layer of the new DeFi architec-
ture. To go beyond simple interactions such as the transfer of coins or assets on the
blockchain, many newer protocols starting from Ethereum provide the opportunity to
embed pieces of scripting code that can in theory carry out any computation. These
pieces of code became known as “smart contracts”. The name and the concept are
credited to the cryptographer Nick Szabo who deﬁned smart contracts in 1994 as “a
set of promises, speciﬁed in digital form, including protocols within which the parties
perform on these promises”. The modern implementation of this idea arrived with
the creation of Ethereum, which is designed to execute smart contracts and makes it
convenient for developers to build applications on top of the blockchain. 6
By itself using software code to represent and execute contractual agreements is
not new. For example, when trading via an online brokerage platform, each time a
customer sets up a limit order that automatically buys certain stocks when prices
match a predeﬁned level, the contract is executed by a software program. Financial
markets or e-commerce are dominated by these types of arrangements since they allow
a large volume of transactions to be executed quickly and eﬃciently. But even if the
program automatically executes a set of tasks, in traditional electronic contracts, the
parties to the contract still have recourse to the legal system if there is a dispute. For
example, if a limit order is executed based on wrong information used by the online
brokerage platform, the client can seek restitution from the brokerage through the
courts.
The critical diﬀerences, from an economic perspective, between traditional elec-
tronic arrangements and smart contracts that are executed on a permissionless blockchain,
arise from how the contracts are executed and enforced. 7 We show since smart con-
tracts are self-executing once they have been embedded in the blockchain, they require
contracting parties to complete contracts as much as possible ex ante, since they can-
not rely on the ex post remedial protections through the legal system. We discuss the
implications of this switch for the transactions costs of writing contracts, the ability of
contracting parties to opt out of the current legal protections, and the constraints to
consumer ﬁnancial protections. The need to import up-to-date information from the
outside (oﬀ-chain) world into the blockchain also led to the development of a new set of
entities, so-called oracles. We lay out their role for the functioning of smart contracts
6See Ethereum White Paper, https://ethereum.org/en/whitepaper/.
7Smart contracts can also be implemented on permissioned blockchains. In this paper, we focus on
smart contracts run on permissionless and public blockchain protocols, since their major applications
have been hosted on such blockchains.
11

===== PAGE 14 =====

and potential vulnerabilities that are introduced through oracles. Finally, we argue
that this new architecture might require contracting parties to rely on a new set of
trusted intermediaries, such as the developers of the smart contract platform or coders
that help to write the computer programs that will be executed on the blockchain.
2.1. Execution and enforcement
The execution of a smart contract on a permissionless blockchain fundamentally
changes the process of enforcement, see Werbach and Cornell (2017), Werbach (2018).
First, once a program has been executed, the distributed nature of the contract veriﬁ-
cation makes it impossible to unilaterally stop or reverse its execution, unless certain
conditions for stopping the smart contract were included in the program ex ante. Sec-
ond, even if one party wanted to sue a counterparty, there might not be any party
that can be held accountable because of the anonymity of the transactions. Practically
speaking there might be no one who can be served with a legal notice.
These changes are important for the application of contract law, since it is fun-
damentally a remedial institution that operates on an ex-post basis. First, contract
law aims to rectify situations ex post, where one party has wronged another party by
breaching the terms of the contract or not delivering on a promised action.
Second, the law incorporates a variety of doctrines, which allow one or multiple
parties to annul the contract ex post. These exemptions are meant to protect con-
tracting parties against unwittingly (or deliberately) taking advantage of each other
or of an unforeseen situation. These are issues such as unconscionability, mutual mis-
take, illegality, capacity, consideration, fraud, or duress. The role of judges and the
legal system then is to oversee and enforce the intended application of the law in these
cases. In other words, the role of the legal system is to complete contracts that were
either deliberately or unintentionally left incomplete ex ante, see Wright and De Filippi
(2015).
Of course, contracts are written in the shadow of the law. The expectations that
contracting parties have about how laws will get enforced, aﬀect how contracts are
written in the ﬁrst place, and which parts can be left unspeciﬁed. Since smart contracts
do not allow for recourse to the legal system, they have to be written as complete
contracts upfront. Or at a minimum the contracting parties have to specify exactly
which states of the world they are willing to leave unspeciﬁed. Since the smart contract
cannot be unilaterally stopped and renegotiated, if a state of the world is not ex ante
speciﬁed, the program will execute as if this state never existed.
This example highlights that a contract breach in the traditional sense is not possi-
12

===== PAGE 15 =====

ble on the blockchain. Once the parameters encoded in the smart contracts are realized,
the code will execute the transaction. This signiﬁcantly reduces the chance of one party
to a contract reneging on it after the fact, say because they changed their mind or they
were not serious about the transaction in the ﬁrst place. But the automatic execution
of smart contracts also eliminates the opportunity for “eﬃcient breach”. Take the sit-
uation of a mutual mistake, where a buyer and seller agreed to the purchase of an asset
at a speciﬁc price. But just before the seller is supposed to deliver the asset, she realizes
that the asset is worth much more than either side had realized. Here, in a traditional
contracting situation, the seller could engage in “eﬃcient breach” and not deliver the
asset until both side had a chance to renegotiate the terms of the deal. However, with
a smart contract the transfer will be executed, since the parties by deﬁnition did not
plan for the mutual mistake upfront. And a similar logic holds for many of the other
protections that traditional contract law awards. This shifts the status quo of which
parties will be in the role of plaintiﬀ and defendant. 8
2.2. Smart contract trade-oﬀs
2.2.1. Transaction costs of contracting
As the discussion above highlights smart contracts must be written in precise, fully
deﬁned computer code since they cannot be modiﬁed once executed. Many proponents
of smart contracts have suggested that this reduces their cost, since there is no scope
for ex post renegotiation. But these cost savings might be oﬀset by the higher upfront
costs of negotiating and specifying the precise terms of an agreement in all possible
states of the world. These up-front costs will become especially high when there is
large uncertainty about the future states of the world or if these states are hard to
imagine and to deﬁne ex ante.
To mitigate these issues, traditional contract law systems provide a series of manda-
tory and default positions that allocate risk when matters are left unspeciﬁed. In the
case of smart contracts this default to the legal system is not possible. So, the costs
must be borne by the individuals engaging in the contract. In the case of contracts,
which are very simple and standardizable, some templates of code will most likely be
developed that anyone can use to embed in a smart contract. This can reduce the up-
front cost in cases where many people have very similar contract issues and the future
states and outcomes over which the contract needs to be deﬁned are also very standard
8Parties to a smart contract could try putting in protections against mutual mistakes by writing into
the contract arbitration of third party experts, but this would require trust in experts and therefore,
would go against the main idea of smart contracts.
13

===== PAGE 16 =====

and simple to understand. However, as soon as there is more variation in possible
contract templates that can be considered in a contracting situation, the mental cost
of comparing and understanding the diﬀerent options might become quite high. And
of course, the costs are even higher if the situation is unique, and a lot of value is at
stake. Here parties cannot choose from existing templates but have a strong incentive
to not inadvertently miss or miscode a possible state of the world. This means they
do have to bear the upfront costs of trying to write as complete a contract as possible.
2.2.2. Smart contracts as a commitment device
Even people who trust the legal system might in some situations want to avoid ex
post litigation risk to bring down ex ante cost, for example, reducing the possibility
of opportunistic behavior or eﬃcient contract breach ex post. Take a situation where
both parties to a contract are well informed about the functioning of a certain ﬁnancial
product, say a mortgage, and thus ideally the lender would not need to spend time
developing education material to inform the borrower about what happens in case of
default. However, if the borrower has the right to sue ex post if she was not informed
that the lender can seize the property, the lender will be forced to develop training
material to prove that the borrower has been informed. An informed borrower and
lender might be better oﬀ if they could shut oﬀ the opportunity for the borrower to sue
in case of default. It would eliminate the lender’s need to invest in expensive training
material which is wasteful in this case. But since the borrower cannot abdicate their
right to sue, both parties must bear the cost of the upfront training.
These issues apply in situations where both parties to a contract are sure that they
do not value any ex-post protection through contract laws. This requires that both sides
must be well informed about the logic of the contract, all the possible ex post outcomes
and do not fear the possibility of being taken advantage of. In ﬁnancial markets this is
an important concern since many contracts involve investments in complex and risky
products, say for example trading in derivatives. If customers could sue each time a
bad state of the world realizes and claim that they were misled about the product,
intermediaries would not be able to sell any risky securities. In the US the law has
addressed these issues by granting certain exemptions to high-net-worth individuals
or people who can demonstrate their knowledge in those products. But it does not
provide sweeping exemptions from the ex post protections of contract law, since in
many situations consumers might not even be aware of their own lack of knowledge
relative to an informed market participant.
14

===== PAGE 17 =====

2.2.3. Smart contracts and consumer ﬁnancial protection
A large literature in ﬁnance has shown that many participants in ﬁnancial con-
tracts, especially retail investors, lack ﬁnancial literacy and are not well prepared to
understand ﬁnancial markets, see for example Lusardi and Mitchell (2007). Although
parties are generally free to enter into agreements, subject to certain limitations and
exceptions, the law protects parties in certain situations by determining whether they
had the capacity to enter into a legally binding agreement. For example, contracts
may be voidable if made by a minor or persons who are mentally ill or intoxicated at
the time of contracting. By not allowing mandatory ex post protections through the
legal system, smart contracts do not provide suﬃcient safeguards for ﬁnancially less
informed or more fragile customers. Since smart contracts typically have limited means
to test for a person’s ﬁnancial sophistication or mental capacity, the enforcement of
these contracts could lead to undesirable outcomes, if there is no provision to reverse
the outcome as in traditional contract law.
If ﬁnancially less sophisticated consumers are aware of their lack of knowledge and
understand that there is a risk that in such an environment they are disadvantaged, the
most plausible result would be to opt out of this contracting environment. However, if
smart contracts became the predominant form of contracting it would severely aﬀect
market participation of less sophisticated consumers. Or alternatively these customers
would have to ﬁnd trusted intermediaries to act on their behalf. So we are back to
the original problem of how to ensure good performance of intermediaries. But given
the pseudonymity of the blockchain environment it would be more diﬃcult to build
trust. Furthermore, a large literature in behavioral ﬁnance has shown that many
ﬁnancially unsophisticated consumers are not aware of their lack of information or are
overoptimistic about their ability to participate in ﬁnancial market. As a result they
might unknowingly sign contracts that are against their own interests, see for example
Laibson et al. (2007) or Campbell (2016).
To curtail the most egregious abuses in the traditional system, the US has a set of
consumer ﬁnancial protection regulations in place such as the Consumer Financial Pro-
tection Act, Fair Debt Collection Practices Act, or Truth in Lending Act. These aim to
reduce the asymmetry in knowledge and information between ﬁnancial institutions and
customers to provide better outcomes for consumers. The example above suggests that
these types of regulations will be diﬃcult to implement on a permissionless blockchain.
15

===== PAGE 18 =====

2.2.4. Are smart contracts really “trustless”?
An often-highlighted promise of smart contracts is that they may reduce the need
for trust between contracting parties, or trust in the legal system. Legal enforcement
of contracts can be cumbersome and prone to error. In some societies the legal system
itself can even be corrupt and biased. If people do not trust the legal system, they
might prefer a decentralized execution that is not subject to ex post discretion. But
it is not clear whether trust can be removed altogether from the process of smart
contracting or whether it simply requires a shift of trust to other intermediaries and
systems.
In a narrow set of circumstances, smart contract can automatically enforce transac-
tions if all parts of the transaction are on-chain. For example, a contract that exchanges
one token for another on the same blockchain does not rely on enforcement or adju-
dication outside the blockchain. Here the level of trust is as high as the trust in the
blockchain itself. Some level of trust is still required. For example, parties need to
trust the developers that oversee a network’s protocol that they have not embedded
errors in the coding of the platform. Or that the consensus protocol is well enough
designed that it is not prone to any attacks.
However, the vast majority of important ﬁnancial interactions rely on assets, ac-
tions, or information that exist outside the blockchain. For example, one of the most
important ﬁnancial contracts a typical household in the US holds, is a mortgage against
their house. While one could imagine a smart contract that uses the home as collateral,
the transfer of the house cannot be fully automated on the blockchain ledger. First
the smart contract would have to stipulate how the deed record in the public data
base must change, in case of default or non-repayment of the loan. Second, even if
we assume that the deed record itself lives on the same blockchain, if the person who
currently occupies the house does not move out when the ownership changes, it does
need oﬀ chain veriﬁcation and enforcement to change the de facto state that matters,
e.g. can you occupy the house you supposedly own.
Getting oﬀ-chain data presents a number of challenges. The solution revolves
around the use of “oracles” — an oﬀ-chain entity that creates a transaction on-chain
with the data posted. Oracles deﬁne how a smart contract incorporates oﬀ-chain in-
formation into the execution of a program, which we discuss in detail in the next
Section 2.3. The consequence of using oracles is that parties need to trust them.
In addition, given the lack of an ex-post appeals process via the law, a lot is at
stake when specifying a smart contract to be as complete as possible upfront. Espe-
cially for transactions that are more complicated, the machine-readable code for the
smart contract must be complete and follow strict rules of syntax and semantics. In
16

===== PAGE 19 =====

practice, most people are not able to write this type of contract themselves, and there-
fore must rely on coders, or third-party developers. This can lead to perverse incentive
for developers who are more knowledgeable than the principal who hires them to take
advantage of them and exploit deliberate vulnerabilities in the code. The fact that
the code underlying the contract is stored on the blockchain and publicly accessible
alleviates but does not completely eliminate the problem. The pseudonymity of the
blockchain makes it diﬃcult to conﬁrm if a developer of a code is also the agent bene-
ﬁting from any vulnerability. And at least currently, developers are not bound by the
same ﬁduciary standards as ﬁnancial intermediaries.
2.2.5. Observability
When interacting with a regular server-based web application, the user often cannot
observe the details of the application’s internal logic. As a result, the user has to trust
the application service provider. Smart contracts mitigate this problem and ensure
that an application runs as expected, since the code underlying the contract is stored
on the blockchain and publicly accessible. However, this type of observability can also
have a downside if it leads to strategic behavior. For example, take any rating system
in ﬁnance such as a personal credit score or a ﬁrms bond rating. If the smart contract
spells out exactly how the score is calculated, users might optimize against the code so
that they land just above the cut oﬀ for the best category. This could undermine the
usefulness of these types of scores, see for example Berg et al. (2020) for an example
of loan oﬃcers gaming a scoring threshold.
Another possible problem with the observability of data on the blockchain has
been highlighted in Cong and He (2019). Since generating decentralized consensus
entails distributing information, it changes the information environment for the market
participants. In particular, as Cong and He (2019) argue it can encourage greater
collusion between interested parties.
2.3. Oracles
While the blockchain tries to remove the reliance on third party enforcement, smart
contracts often need to access data from outside the blockchain if they want to interact
with the real world. Consider, for a example, a limit order, where a person writes a
smart contract to automatically sell a token of Bitcoin when the price hits a certain
target level. For this contract to work, the contract needs to access up-to-date Bitcoin
prices. If the data is not obtained in an accurate and timely fashion, a smart trader
could reap large gains by taking advantage of stale or wrong prices.
17

===== PAGE 20 =====

One solution would have been to allow the smart contract to obtain the price by
querying an API of some exchange. The problem with this solution is that almost all
blockchains are designed to be deterministic, which means that any state should be
reproducible given the history of the network transactions. Determinism is important
so that diﬀerent nodes that execute the contract can come to a consensus. Since
querying the internet can in general produce diﬀerent values (for example, the price
depends on the time of the query), allowing the smart contract to query the price would
lead to diﬀerent values across the nodes, thus making the consensus impossible.
A solution to the above problem is to use an oﬀ-chain entity that does the query
and posts the data on-chain. Once the data are on-chain smart contracts can access
and use them. The oﬀ-chain entities that query, verify, and authenticate external data
sources and then transmit the information to a blockchain in the crypto parlance are
called oracles.
There are many types of oracles. 9 The central issue in design of any oracle is trust.
Similar to a chain, which is as strong as it is weakest link, a smart contract is as secure
as its least secure components. If the data supplied by an oracle are corrupted then so
is the output of the smart contract.
The simplest design of an oracle is where an entity queries a single data provider
and records the data on the blockchain. For example, it could be a query from a
Coinbase web API. This is called a centralized oracle, which is often a fast and eﬃcient
solution. However, reliance on one centralized entity and one centralized data source
introduces several potential points of failure. First, the entity can be corrupted. For
example, the oracle could withhold the data or front run on information it provides.
Second, the data can be corrupted in the process of transferring from the data source
to the blockchain because of a software bug. Finally, the data source itself needs to be
trusted.
In its perpetual quest to minimize trust from relying on third parties, the crypto
community therefore has been actively working on new oracle designs. Inspired by the
decentralized trust model of permissionless blockchain protocols, decentralized oracles
have become one of the fastest growing solutions, with Chainlink currently dominating
the space. The main idea behind any decentralized oracle is (a) to source data from a
large and heterogeneous set of entities (nodes) to determine the validity and accuracy
of the data and (b) by using incentive mechanisms and skin-in-the-game to keep the
entities honest.
Similar to PoS protocols, every participating node that delivers data has to stake
9See, for example, Beniiche (2020) and Caldarelli and Ellul (2021) for a survey of diﬀerent oracle
types.
18

===== PAGE 21 =====

a deposit, typically in the native token of the network. If the node provides accurate
data, it earns a reward. If it misbehaves, the node can lose a percentage of its stake,
and in some cases, access to future participation in the oracle network and as a result,
all future revenue from the protocol.
The fundamental challenge then is to determine what the truth is. In a blockchain,
the correctness of transactions is a property of internal consistency (no double spend-
ing). There can be multiple conﬂicting versions of the blockchain (forks), but there
is always one that is correct, and the goal of validators is to agree on which one. In
an oracle network, the situation is more complicated. Depending on the nature of the
data in an oracle network, there might not be the “true” report, but only its noisy
realizations. Therefore, a typical solution to determine the consensus report is to rely
on the wisdom of the crowd and use some form of aggregation across reports, e.g., take
the median or mean value.
This reliance on a diversiﬁed set of data providers, however, exposes the process to
the possibility of an adversarial attack, where an adversary bribes the existing nodes
or sets up nodes to produce a corrupt report. Equally problematic, could be collusion
among oracle nodes. If the gains from collusion become very high, the oracle nodes
might not care to lose their current stakes or even all future stakes. As a consequence,
the oracle’s economic rent should be high enough to ensure that its members are to
remain honest.
The research on decentralized oracles is in ﬂedgling state. 10 There are many open
questions. For example, holding the size of oracles network ﬁxed what design is the
most resilient to the bribery attack? Is it optimal to restrict the size of the network
or allow a free entry of nodes? Holding economic rent of an oracle ﬁxed, what is the
maximum stake that can be written on the oracle’s output?
3. The current cryptocurrency landscape
According to CoinGecko, there are currently over 10,000 crypto tokens with an ag-
gregate market cap of more than $2 Trillion. Several classiﬁcations have been proposed
for crypto tokens. 11 We have found useful to parse the universe of crypto tokens into
the following large categories depicted in Figure 2.
[Fig. 2 About Here]
10See the Chainlink white paper https://chain.link/whitepaper and references there in.
11See, for example, Cong and Xiao (2021), Prasad (2021). The recent CAP report describes
how cryptocurrencies ﬁt in the current regulatory landscape, https://www.americanprogress.org/
article/congress-must-not-provide-statutory-carveouts-for-crypto-assets/.
19

===== PAGE 22 =====

3.1. Stablecoins
To start with, we can separate crypto tokens into stablecoins and non-stablecoins.
Stablecoins are designed to maintain a peg to ﬁat-currencies and therefore, act as a
safe asset that is not subject to the same volatility as many cryptocurrencies. The
absence of central bank digital currency (CBDC) and the growth of DeFi applications
based on smart contracts created a strong demand for private stablecoins that are
native to cryptocurrency protocols. If at the beginning of 2021 the market value of
all stablecoins was $30 billion then by February 2022 it has reached $180 billion. As
a point of comparison, the total amount of British Pound banknotes in circulation is
equal to about £80 billion.12
The existing stablecoins can be divided into stablecoins backed by traditional liquid
and safe assets, for example, US dollars and treasury bills, and algorithmic stablecoins
backed by other cryptocurrencies. Figure 3, the left panel shows the relative share of
stablecoins backed by traditional and crypto assets, with the former being the vast
majority.
[Fig. 3 About Here]
The middle and right panel show the largest stablecoins within each category. The
stablecoins backed by traditional assets are dominated by just three coins Tether, USD
Coin, and Binance USD. To guarantee the peg, the stablecoins backed by traditional
assets should be backed one to one by cash or cashlike assets such as US treasuries.
Many stablecoin providers had made claims that their tokens were 100% backed by
liquid assets, only later to reveal that it was not the case. The famous examples include
the two most popular stablecoins, Tether and USD Coin. 13 In both cases, some part
of collateral was held in securities subject to default risk. In October 2021, Tether
was ﬁned $41 million by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission for making
misleading claims about being backed one to one by the US dollar.
Along with the stablecoins backed by traditional assets there have also been growing
acceptance of algorithmic stablecoins. The combined value of algorithmic stablecoins
exceeds $25 billion, with the largest coins being Dai and Terra USD. The rising popu-
larity of algorithmic stablecoins can again be traced to the desire of crypto community
not to rely on centralized parties. Since ﬁat currencies are issued by governments, the
12See https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/statistics/banknote.
13See, for example, https://www.coindesk.com/markets/2021/05/13/tethers-first-
reserve-breakdown-shows-token-49-backed-by-unspecified-commercial-paper/ and
https://www.coindesk.com/business/2021/07/20/circle-reveals-assets-backing-usdc-
stablecoin/.
20

===== PAGE 23 =====

stablecoins backed by traditional assets depend on the trust in government. To break
from the need to trust the government, algorithmic stablecoins, or as they are often
called programmable money, use other cryptocurrencies as a collateral or/and sophis-
ticated algorithms to regulate the stablecoin supply so that to maintain the peg. 14
There are now increasing calls for an urgent regulation of the stablecoins. The
main concern is that lack of transparency in reporting of the reserves and inadequate
collateral can make stablecoins to be prone to a run. We get back to these issues in
Section 4.5.
3.2. Non-stablecoins
Non-stablecoins constitute a large and diverse group. Their value depends on the
current investor sentiment and ﬂuctuates widely over time. First, we can isolate coins
that have no other function than being a cryptocurrency, either used for transaction
purposes or as a store value. This group includes the ﬁrst generation of cryptocur-
rencies such as Bitcoin, Litecoin, etc. By construction, these are the cryptocurrencies
that are built on non-smart contract platforms. The majority of these cryptocurrencies
are based on PoW blockchains. Early on, crypto enthusiasts hoped that these cryp-
tocurrencies could replace government-sponsored currencies as a transaction medium.
However, it quickly became clear that this was infeasible because verifying transactions
on public PoW ledgers is slow and highly energy-ineﬃcient. Since then, a new narra-
tive for the beneﬁts of these coins emerged, with them positioned as the new “gold”
— a digital store of value. Figure A.1 in the Appendix shows that Bitcoin dominates
this group with a market share of more than 90%, followed by Dogecoin. Dogecoin
was created in 2013 by two software engineers Billy Markus and Jackson Palmer as a
parody of a cryptocurrency that was meant to be worthless. It sharply increased in
value and became the ﬁrst meme coin in 2021 following public support by Elon Musk.
3.2.1. Smart-contract platforms
Another large group are tokens issued by smart contract platforms such as Ethereum,
Binance Smart Chain, Solana, Cardano, etc. In many ways, these tokens are similar to
the tokens in the ﬁrst group. In particular, they can also be used to pay for transac-
tions on the platform and are a claim on the platform’s economic value. The reason we
separate them from the ﬁrst group is that cryptocurrencies in the ﬁrst group oﬀer no
14See, for example, Dai and Terra White Papers for further details: https://assets.website-
files.com/611153e7af981472d8da199c/618b02d13e938ae1f8ad1e45_Terra_White_paper.pdf,
https://makerdao.com/en/whitepaper.
21

===== PAGE 24 =====

intrinsic economic value other than the potential for capital appreciation. Therefore,
it is unclear what aggregate risk, other than inﬂation, they are supposed to be tied to.
In contrast, the value of a smart contract platform depends on the scope and the
number of applications run on the platform since they aﬀect the number of transactions
and the amount of transaction fees, which in turn, inﬂuence the price of the platform
token.15 Figure A.2 and Figure A.3 in the Appendix show the development of smart
contract platforms. The left panel of Figure A.2 shows the evolution of the market
value of diﬀerent platforms. The right panel shows platforms’ market share. Figure A.3
shows the growth of the total value locked (TVL) on the platforms. TVL is the overall
value of crypto assets deposited in applications run on the platform. It has emerged
as a main metric for gauging interest in a particular platform or sector of the crypto
industry.
Figure A.2 and Figure A.3 show that smart-contract platforms grew exceptionally
fast in 2021. If at the start of 2021, the total market value of smart-contract platforms
was around $144 billion, at the end of January 2022 it stood at $683 billion, almost
reaching $1 trillion in November 2021. Similarly, the combined TVL across all platforms
was 18 billion in the beginning of 2021 and grew to about 177 billion by February 2022.
Figure A.2 and Figure A.3 also show that Ethereum still dominates this space. The
market share of Ethereum has been relatively stable at about 50%. The high fees on
Ethereum platform, however, have led to the growth of other smart platforms and to
an increase in share of applications deployed on them. If in the beginning of 2021,
Ethereum completely dominated the space, by the end of 2021, its share declined to
66%.
3.2.2. DeFi applications
Smart contracts layered on a permissionless blockchain protocol have given rise to
the emergence of what is called decentralized ﬁnance (DeFi) — a suite of ﬁnancial
applications meant to replicate many of the elements of traditional ﬁnancial system
without relying on centralized intermediaries.
Figure 4 shows the ﬁve largest DeFi sectors. The main applications so far have
been centered on trading platforms, borrowing and lending marketplaces, oracles, yield
farming, and insurance. The left panel shows the evolution of the market value of the
sectors; the right panel — the total value locked in each sector.
15This division in the two groups is a simpliﬁcation since even the Bitcoin blockchain can host other
protocols, e.g., Omni layer, or help secure other platforms, e.g., Rootstock, DeFiChain. However,
presently the scope of these applications compared to those built on smart contract platforms is
limited.
22

===== PAGE 25 =====

[Fig. 4 About Here]
Decentralized crypto exchanges. Decentralized exchanges (DEXs) have attracted
a lot of attention and have become the fastest growing sector of the DeFi universe.
One of the main advantages of decentralized exchanges over centralized exchanges is
the ability for users to keep control of their private keys. When market participants
deposit their crypto tokens with a centralized exchange they forfeit their ownership to
the exchange. This makes them exposed to exchange risk — if the exchange is hacked
and its funds are stolen investors can experience signiﬁcant losses. More generally,
trading on a centralized exchange requires participants to trust in the exchange that
goes against the maxim of decentralized ﬁnance. Trading on DEXs is governed by
smart contracts and eliminates counterparty risk for the investors. The settlement of
transactions is instantaneous, after they are conﬁrmed and included on the blockchain.
The majority of DEXs use an automated market maker (AMM) protocols, which
allow a direct exchange of two crypto tokens, say X and Y . The main object in an
AMM protocol is a new market structure called liquidity pool. A liquidity pool consists
of two pools: one of X tokens and one of Y tokens. The ratio of tokens in each pool
deﬁnes the current exchange rate between the two tokens.
A liquidity pool supports two main operations: liquidity provision and a swap
between the two tokens. Anyone who owns the two tokens can choose to be a liquidity
provider by depositing tokens X and Y to the respective pools in the proportion equal
to the current ratio. In return, the liquidity provider receives a claim on the share of
the two pools’ tokens (the so-called LP tokens).
A swap order allows one to exchange one token for the other. The exchange rate
depends on a particular implementation of the AMM protocol and is determined by
some deterministic rule called the bonding curve. For example, in the constant product
AMM used by a popular DEX Uniswap 2 if the initial amounts of X and Y tokens in
the liquidity pool are x and y, and someone wants to exchange ∆ x of X tokens for Y
tokens the exchange rate is determined according to the following rule:
(x + ∆x)· (y + ∆y) = x· y ⇔ ∆y
∆x =− y
x + ∆x. (1)
Swapping X for Y increases the relative share of X tokens in the liquidity pool and
therefore, lowers its price relative to the price of Y tokens. Whenever the equilibrium
price of the two tokens deviates from the current ratio in the two pools, one can proﬁt
from it by executing a swap order until the ratio reaches the equilibrium price. To
compensate liquidity providers for providing liquidity everyone who executes a swap
order pays a transaction fee that goes to the liquidity pool. This is similar to limit-
23

===== PAGE 26 =====

order book exchanges, where liquidity takers executing a market order usually pay to
liquidity providers who supply limit orders. 16
The DEX’s smart contract usually allows to trade any pair of tokens supported
by the underlying blockchain. For example, Uniswap 2, realized on the Ethereum
blockchain, allows to trade any pair of ERC 20 tokens. If no liquidity pool exists for a
particular pair of tokens, it can be freely created. The viability of the pool then depends
on the ability of the pool to attract liquidity providers and traders. The liquidity is
usually concentrated in a few pairs. Figure A.4 in the Appendix shows how DEX
trading volume compares against CEX. While the volume of DEX has experienced fast
growth, it still constitutes only a fraction of the CEX volume.
Similar to centralized exchanges, a few DEX dominate the space. Figure A.5 in the
Appendix, left panel shows the market share of the top 10 centralized exchanges, the
right panel shows the top 10 decentralized exchanges. The majority of CEX volume is
concentrated on oﬀshore exchanges such as Binance, Huobi, OkEx, and FTX, which
are subject to little or no regulatory oversight. Similarly, Uniswap, PancakeSwap and
SushiSwap account for about 70% volume among decentralized exchanges.
Borrowing and lending. Lending protocols have been another fast growing sector
of the DeFi. Similar to DEXs, lending and borrowing are governed by smart contracts.
The vast majority of DeFi lending is over-collateralized loans secured by other crypto
coins, which is primarily used for creating leveraged trading positions.
A typical transaction involves borrowing some of the stablecoins and putting Ethereum
or Bitcoin as a collateral. Since the value of Ethereum or Bitcoin ﬂuctuates there is a
danger that the value of collateral can be lower than the borrowed amount. To mit-
igate this risk a smart contract uses an Oracle to obtain up-to-date cryptocurrency
prices and automatically liquidate the position if the loan-to-value falls below a speci-
ﬁed threshold. The threshold depends on the perceived riskiness of the collateral token
and ranges between 50% and 80%.
A borrower has to pay a borrowing interest rate and can receive a lending rate
on their collateral. In addition, a protocol collects a fee for its service, which goes to
the pool controlled by protocol token holders. The lending rate is a function of the
borrowing rate and the utilization of funds: borrowing fees, net of protocol fees, are
spread among all lenders. The borrowing rate depends on the asset. It is set by the
smart contract to maximize utilization of funds and changes in response to the market
conditions.
Figure 5 shows that similar to DEX, the lending space is dominated by a few large
16See Aoyagi (2020), Aoyagi and Ito (2021), Lehar and Parlour (2021), and Capponi and Jia (2021)
for further results and comparison of decentralized and centralized exchanges.
24

===== PAGE 27 =====

players such as Aave, Anchor, and Compound protocols. Most protocols operate on a
few chains. For example, Aave is built on three smart-contract platforms: Ethereum,
Avalanche, and Polygon; Anchor only uses Terra, and Compound only Ethereum.
Thus, the concentration within a particular smart contract platform is even higher.
[Fig. 5 About Here]
Figure A.6 in the Appendix shows the aggregated amount deposited and bor-
rowed across diﬀerent crypto tokens. The main activity is concentrated in stablecoins
along with Ethereum and Wrapped Bitcoin (WBTC).17 A large imbalance between the
amount deposited and borrowed for Ethereum and Bitcoin means that investors use
them as a collateral to borrow stablecoins, which can be used, for example, to buy
Ethereum and Bitcoin, thus creating a leveraged position.
Yield farming. The desire to earn supersized returns led to the proliferation of smart
contracts that aim to maximize the yield from holding crypto tokens. As we showed
above crypto investors have several strategies to earn return on their coins. First,
they can delegate their coins to validators who stake the coins and earn rewards for
veriﬁcation of transactions. Second, investors can earn fees for providing liquidity to
DEXs. Third, they can earn an interest by depositing their coins into lending protocols.
Finally, some token providers use airdrops — the practice of giving away tokens to a
subset of investors meeting particular criteria.
The return on any of the above strategies varies over time. Yield farming smart
contracts (or simply yield farms) aim to optimize the return by optimally allocating
investments among multiple protocols and DeFi applications. The process also usually
involves high leverage. For example, LP tokens obtained after placing tokens in a
liquidity pool can be further used as a collateral or deposited into lending protocols.
The high leverage creates a risk of large losses due to a chain reaction of multiple
contracts being liquidated when some contracts lose their value either during downturn
market movements or because of some hacks. Also, while yield farm strategies are
designed to maximize the yield on investment it does not automatically mean high
returns because the underlying crypto tokens can loose value. In many cases, high
yields are ﬁnanced through in an increase in the token supply where the net eﬀect
depends on the investors willingness to absorb an ever increasing supply of tokens.
17Wrapped Bitcoin is an Ethereum token that is intended to represent Bitcoin on the Ethereum
blockchain. It is backed on a 1:1 basis with Bitcoin.
25

===== PAGE 28 =====

3.2.3. NFT
Lastly, 2021 have seen a meteoric rise in hype and value of non-fungible tokens
(NFTs). NFT is a unique piece of data stored on a blockchain. The data can be
associated with a particular digital or physical asset or a license to use the asset for a
speciﬁed purpose. Because each token is uniquely identiﬁable, NFTs diﬀer from other
cryptocurrencies. NFTs can be bought and sold, and are seen as a form of digital art.
The space attracted attention in March 2021 when a digital collage of 5,000 images
by the artist known as Beeple was sold at an eye-popping price of $69 million at the
Christie’s auction house. The combined value of all NFTs in the end of January 2022
stood at about $13 billion.18
4. DeFi vs. traditional ﬁnancial system
Many of the existing problems with intermediaries originate from well-known eco-
nomic frictions that are inherent in ﬁnancial markets, such as asymmetric informa-
tion, adverse selection, moral hazard, etc. This creates opportunities for abuse and
also signiﬁcant costs of guarding the public and the economy against ﬁnancial fraud,
malfeasance and systemic risk. Technological innovations have a long history in ﬁnance
in helping to provide solutions to the above problems and improving the eﬃciency of
ﬁnancial markets.
DeFi applications thus far have had limited scope; they have been mainly built
around simple applications such as trading in cryptocurrencies or collateralized lending.
But they are growing rapidly in scope and complexity. They also escaped the burden of
regulation and consumer protections and beneﬁted from tremendous investor optimism
that allowed many problems and ineﬃciencies to go unnoticed.
In what follows, we aim to highlight the important trade-oﬀs oﬀered by the two
architectures. When comparing the potential beneﬁts of DeFi solutions with those
oﬀered by the traditional system, it is important to think about the proposed new so-
lutions in the context of the larger ﬁnancial architecture rather than narrowly focusing
on individual dimensions of possible ineﬃciencies.
4.1. Data privacy and transparency
How to protect data privacy in an increasingly digital society has become a major
concern to regulators, activists and regular citizens alike. Crypto enthusiasts often
tout the anonymity of transactions “a feature, not a bug” and view it as a major
18https://nftgo.io/overview.
26

===== PAGE 29 =====

beneﬁt over the traditional model, where the failure or corruption of a centralized
intermediary could lead client data to be mistakenly exposed or hacked. While it is
in the commercial interest of intermediaries to protect the privacy of their clients, it
is a reasonable concern that intermediaries might not endogenize the full cost to the
clients.19 This conﬂict leads to a classic underinvestment problem relative to what
consumers would prefer. In addition, ﬁnancial intermediaries might have an interest in
using client data for their own commercial purposes, or allowing third parties access,
including the government.
Recognizing this problem, in the US a large set of regulations, such as the Bank
Secrecy Act, Right to Financial Privacy Act, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, and the Fair
Credit Reporting Act, are put in place to protect consumers from unlawful access to
their ﬁnancial accounts by private and public institutions, and the unlawful disclosure
or commercial use of ﬁnancial information.
But the laws also recognize an important trade-oﬀ between individual privacy and
other important societal goals such as preventing malevolent actors from using the
ﬁnancial system for money laundering, ﬁnancing of criminal and terrorist activities,
or tax evasion. This is typically achieved by putting into place Know-Your-Customer
(KYC) and anti-money laundering (AML) laws that require ﬁnancial institutions to
verify the identity of a client when opening an account and to provide government
authorities with information about suspicious ﬁnancial transactions. Financial inter-
mediaries in the traditional system then play the dual role of acting on the one hand as
a “shield” to prevent the unauthorized collection, use, and disclosure of sensitive data.
But on the other hand, they selectively grant access to information in well-deﬁned cir-
cumstances where access to such data is important for the functioning of the economy
or the broader society. Examples include reporting of capital gain tax to the IRS, or
granting access to ﬁnancial accounts of individuals in cases where an illegal or terrorist
intent has been clearly deﬁned by law and regulation.
Cryptocurrencies built on permissionless protocols preserve privacy by design by
not collecting any personal information about account holders. Crypto tokens are rep-
resented by alphanumeric strings and protected by cryptography algorithms. Crypto
addresses are very easy to generate and many protocols encourage users not to use
an address more than once. Even if a protocol has a complete record of transac-
tions, the identity of the person behind the transactions cannot be established unless
this person uses the tokens to transact with an entity that does enforce KYC norms,
such as regulated ﬁnancial institutions. In many ways, the current modus operandi
19Some infamous recent examples of data breaches in the ﬁnancial are the 2017 breach of Equifax
that exposed personal information of 147 million people or banks like Capital One and First American
Financial Corporation, see https://www.upguard.com/blog/biggest-data-breaches.
27

===== PAGE 30 =====

of cryptocurrencies is similar to an old Swiss model of banking where people could
set up anonymous accounts and no questions were asked. This model, however, has
been rejected in the majority of developed countries in favor of more transparency and
accountability.
Collecting and protecting data is not costless, and in the traditional architecture,
intermediaries bear this cost. The beneﬁts of relying on intermediaries as the important
“entry nodes” for participants in the traditional ﬁnancial system, means that KYC
norms or anti-money laundering laws have to be monitored only at a limited set of
nodes. For example, when a customer makes a payment using a credit card or a bank
transfer from a US bank, a retailer does not need to worry about the legality of the
funds. Similarly, the ability to collect taxes depends on the government’s capacity to
trace transactions and link them back to a person or organization. In the traditional
system, centralized intermediaries such as exchanges or brokers are responsible for
reporting transactions to the IRS.
The permissionless and pseudonymous architecture of DeFi generates formidable
challenges for tax enforcement, aggravates issues of money laundering and other kinds
of ﬁnancial malfeasance, and as a result creates externalities on the rest of the economy.
If entry into the system is not monitored by intermediaries but happens completely
anonymously by setting up an address on a blockchain, KYC norms and AML laws
would need to be regulated at the transactional level. In many cases this could be
prohibitively costly, or impractical, and therefore lead to an in-transparent environment
that facilitates illegal transactions.
Consider, for example, trading on a decentralized exchange. Recall that a decen-
tralized exchange is simply a smart contract that executes trading between any pair
of cryptocurrencies and that can be deployed anonymously by anyone. Suppose a cus-
tomer trades and realizes some capital gains. Since the identity of the person behind
the transactions cannot be established until this person uses the tokens at an entity
that does an ID check, by transacting with entities that do not verify any ID, the
person could spend the tokens linked to the capital gains transactions, and thus avoid
ever paying capital gains taxes.
But even if the person transacts with an entity that does enforce KYC standards,
it does not reveal the capital gains tax that is associated with the past transactions of
this coin. In order to impute the true capital gains tax, the entity would need to either
investigate the full history of transactions up to the current point or would need to
delegate this task to another intermediary. In practice, tracing transactions along often
multiple protocols is a challenging problem. Specialized blockchain analytics companies
such as Bitfury Crystal and Chainalysis have shown that it can be successfully done
28

===== PAGE 31 =====

in select cases of illegal transactions. However, successfully tracing all transactions
will likely be very costly. Makarov and Schoar (2021) show for example, that Bitcoin
ﬂowing out of dark net markets like Hydra can be laundered through many intermediary
addresses and can eventually enter KYC compliant exchanges such as Coinbase or
Gemini without being tagged.
The pseudonymous nature of cryptocurrencies also makes it much harder to enforce
rules against market manipulation, insider trading, and self-dealing, since suspicious
transactions cannot easily be traced back to individuals. For example, large holders of
cryptocurrencies have strong incentives to lobby government oﬃcials or regulators to
promote investments in cryptocurrencies and adopt lax regulation. Especially at the
early stages in the development of new technologies, any announcements endorsing the
oﬃcial use of cryptocurrencies create signiﬁcant positive price impact, see Auer and
Claessens (2020). The danger is that some regulators or politicians (or their friends)
receive gifts in the form of cryptocurrencies (or simply already own cryptocurrencies)
which would tilt their decision towards adoption even if it is not in the interest of the
general public.
As the above discussion shows, to safeguard society against these inherent risks,
a completely new framework of ensuring KYC and AML standards would have to
be developed. The majority of DeFi players actively lobby that they should not be
bearing the costs of linking transactions to economic actors and ensuring that the
ﬁnancial system preserves an adequate level of transparency and accountability citing
technological constraints or the danger of losing a competitive advantage in the crypto
space.20 But unless society gives up entirely on collecting taxes and implementing KYC
and AML practices, somebody has to bear these costs.
4.2. Economic rents
Another important dimension by which to assess a ﬁnancial system is how economic
rents are distributed among agents in the system. An important concern with the
traditional ﬁnancial system has been that the centralized position of intermediaries
can allow them to extract excess economic rents at the expense of their customers.
The proponents of the DeFi architecture typically argue that the open-source and
permissionless nature of DeFi protocols promotes competition. Therefore, the claim is
that DeFi solutions should drive out excess rents.
This view, however, neglects the fact that free entry is not synonymous with more
20See, for example, https://stakingfac.medium.com/staking-infrastructure-providers-
unite-in-the-european-blockchain-association-6ecebbb8139f, https://republicans-
financialservices.house.gov/news/documentsingle.aspx?DocumentID=408238.
29

===== PAGE 32 =====

competition and thus not a panacea for beneﬁcial outcomes in many situations. The
eﬀectiveness of competition depends on a number of factors such as whether there are
barriers to entry, switching costs, product diﬀerentiation, asymmetric information, and
network externalities. The presence of any of these factors hinders competition, and in
some cases, even creates adverse eﬀects from competition. Technological changes that
aﬀect any of these factors, therefore, also transform the competitive landscape.
Similar to the traditional ﬁnancial system, there are several natural points where
rents can accumulate at diﬀerent layers in the DeFi architecture due to endogenous
constraints to competition.
First, at the level of validators of transactions, in both PoW and PoS rents can
accumulate due to inherent economies of scale and scope. In theory, in PoW protocols
if miners were fully decentralized one could expect them to earn zero rent in steady-
state because of free entry. In practice, however, as we showed in Section 1.1, mining
is concentrated in pools and at the level of individual miners. High concentration
of mining power can facilitate collusion and help sustain transaction fees above their
average costs. For a dominant protocol such as Bitcoin, the competition from other
PoW protocols can be limited because of the negative externalities the dominant net-
work has on the security of smaller PoW networks. In particular, mining capacity can
be redirected to launch 51% attacks on the smaller networks, as discussed in section
Section 1.1.
Similarly, rents can also accrue to validators in PoS protocols. We showed in Sec-
tion 1.2 that validators in PoS are concentrated. Furthermore, the same validators are
active across a large cross-section of cryptocurrencies, eﬀectively forming a new mar-
ket structure. These validators control a large proportion of wealth that gives them
substantial competitive advantage over newcomers with small amount of wealth.
Second, rents can also accrue at the level of the smart contract platforms that are
built on the base layers. Similar to traditional payment systems like Visa, Mastercard or
Paypal there are strong network externalities. Smart contract platforms diﬀerentiate
themselves by the choice of programming language to code up smart contracts and
the network architecture, and often have limited degree of interoperability. While
smart contracts built on the same protocol can interact seamlessly with each other,
communication between applications built on diﬀerent platforms in general is limited.21
Naturally, the decision on which platform to build an application on depends on
the existing pool of applications already deployed on the platform and the platform’s
future growth prospects. A popular platform with a wide range of applications and
21A number of solutions have been proposed and are being developed to increase interoperability
between chains, see for example, https://ethereum.org/en/bridges/ for more details.
30

===== PAGE 33 =====

a large user base provide better business prospects, and therefore, is more attractive
than a less popular platform. Often these network eﬀects increase exponentially with
each user. As a result, developers and users might choose a more popular platform
even if it charges higher transaction fees. These network externalities might also stand
in the way of switching to a platform with a better technology if a critical mass of users
is captured by the incumbent platform.
One could argue that even if the platform is a monopolist, competition between
validators on that platform will keep fees low. However, as we showed above high
concentration of validators can lead to collusion and allow them to earn excess rents.
Even if validators do not collude, high transaction fees can still be realized if the
platform operating capacity is limited and users need to pay a premium for priority
execution, Huberman et al. (2021). Finally, the majority of PoS protocols have a
minimum level of transaction fees as a protocol parameter, which provides the platform
with a direct tool to limit competition among validators and earn rent.
Figure A.7 in the Appendix shows total transaction fees in the year 2021 across
diﬀerent platforms. The case of Ethereum is striking. The platform generated $10
billion in fees from about 460 million transaction. In contrast, Visa’s total revenue
was $24 billion over 165 billion transactions. 22 Thus, an average Ethereum fee per
transaction has been 100X that of Visa.
For PoS platforms, an added complexity arises from the fact that the going concern
value of the platform also aﬀects the security of the platform itself and the applications
that run on it. Since the value of the platform depends on the level of transaction fees,
fees should be high enough to deter possible attacks on the platform, which can further
support the platform’s rent in equilibrium. These security concerns can also decrease
competition among platforms. Since a low-value platform can be more easily attacked,
the concerns over the platform’s security may lead to slower growth, which in turn,
can reduce the platform’s current value.
Third, economies of scale at the level of individual DeFi applications can allow
them to assemble local monopoly power and extract rents despite the open-source
architecture of the blockchain. In addition, while in theory crypto smart contracts are
usually described as an open-source code, in practice successful applications have tried
to protect its code and limit its distribution. Here, an example of two decentralized
exchanges, Uniswap and SushiSwap, is instructive.
Originally, Uniswap V2 was operated as an open-source software utilizing a General
Public License (GPL), which allows anyone to run, distribute, and/or modify its code.
22This ﬁgure is larger than transaction fees alone since Visa earns revenue from sources other than
fees paid by direct users.
31

===== PAGE 34 =====

This has been used by a pseudonymous developer called Chef Nomi to create a clone of
Uniswap called SushiSwap. Similar to centralized exchanges, decentralized exchanges
are subject to economies of scale. An exchange with a large liquidity pool is preferred
over an exchange with a small one. Therefore, an exchange clone will typically ﬁnd it
diﬃcult to challenge the original exchange.
To compete with Uniswap, SushiSwap introduced a new business model, which is
now adopted by a majority of other applications. The main change made by Chef
Nomi was to create a governance token (SUSHI) and give it as a reward to traders
who provide liquidity to the platform. The token allows its holders to vote on how the
SushiSwap platform is run and potentially receive a portion of the transaction fees. As
a consequence, investors can trade these tokens and speculate on the future prospects
of the platform. This business model strengthens network externalities, and therefore,
limits copycat strategies and competition. The more valuable the platform and its
tokens are, the higher is the reward for liquidity providers. A larger liquidity pool, in
turn, attracts more trading on the platform, which makes the platform more valuable.
The SUSHI token was also used to launch a “vampire attack” to drain liquidity
out of Uniswap, whereby SUSHI tokens could be exchanged for Uniswap liquidity pool
(LP) tokens. Those LP tokens would then be exchanged for the original assets put into
the Uniswap liquidity pools, thus creating liquidity for SushiSwap instead. The attack
was successful, draining Uniswap of about 55% of its liquidity. 23
In response, Uniswap introduced its own governance token (UNI). To limit copycat
attacks, the new version of the protocol, Uniswap V3, also adopted a diﬀerent license
agreement called Business Source License (BSL), which incorporates copyright law and
allows Uniswap governance to restrict unauthorized commercialization of an entity’s
source code for two years.
Finally, rent extraction can even be driven by frictions at the customer level due to
lack of ﬁnancial literacy or behavioral biases. Many ﬁnancial products today including
smart contracts are complex contracts with multiple features. If consumers lack the
ﬁnancial sophistication to understand these product features, institutions that issue
these contracts can shroud the actual cost of a product or service. A typical shrouding
technique is to advertise or draw attention to one set of attractive features but hide
other more expensive ones. If consumer are unable to analyze what is the best product
even competition might not prevent rent extraction. In fact, more competition might
lead to more shrouding as competing ﬁrms try to appeal to consumers with evermore
enticing and salient features while hiding the unappealing dimensions of the product.
23https://www.vklaw.com/ImagineThatIPLawBlog/uniswap-v3-employs-a-new-license-
agreement.
32

===== PAGE 35 =====

Consumer ﬁnance products are often designed and marketed in this fashion, which
leads to diﬀerential targeting of customers based on their ﬁnancial literacy, see for
example C´ el´ erier and Vall´ ee(2017) or Ru and Schoar (2016). Similarly, in the crypto
space, practices such as airdrops, yield farming, and meme DeFi tokens have helped
capture interest of many investors, but many industry insiders question their value. 24
4.3. Transaction costs
Even if a ﬁnancial system limits economic rents it can still be ineﬃcient because
of high transaction costs. The traditional ﬁnancial system has many ineﬃciencies,
which result in high cost of banking services and long settlement time of transactions.
A substantial part of these costs comes from need to cover brick-and-mortar costs of
traditional banks and outdated infrastructure. Many banks today still use customized
software that goes back to 1980s that lack real-time account reconciliation and liquidity
management capabilities.
While many technological advances are largely exogenous to banks’ actions the
decision to when and how to implement them depends on the ﬁnancial architecture.
Centralized intermediaries can have limited incentives to invest in new technologies
that could threaten their centralized position even if they are welfare improving. Also,
modernizing bank’s internal system can have a limited eﬀect if other banks do not co-
ordinate on the change. Often the threat of losing business to new entrants is necessary
to force the incumbents to adopt more eﬃcient technology.
The development of blockchain technology has had certainly positive eﬀect on the
incentives of ﬁnancial industry to upgrade its infrastructure and reduce costs. It is
less clear, however, to what extent the potential to reduce the costs depends on the
permissionless nature of blockchain. In many cases, arguments can be made that
a permissioned blockchain could designed to deliver a more cost-eﬃcient and robust
solution without curtailing competition. 25
Notice also that the permissionless and open-source nature of a protocol does not
necessary make an innovation process easy. It is often argued that if a blockchain
protocol is ineﬃcient then one can create an improved version (aka hard fork) by
copying and upgrading the existing code. We showed in Section 4.2 that competition
can be limited between diﬀerent protocols because of strong network externalities and
miners/validators can earn rent in equilibrium. If a new fork leaves less rent to min-
24https://decrypt.co/40939/defi-meme-coins-no-joke-billions-ethereum,
https://decrypt.co/40318/vitalik-buterin-ethereum-defi-yield-farmers-central-banks.
25See e.g., https://www.swift.com/news-events/news/swift-completes-landmark-dlt-
proof-concept.
33

===== PAGE 36 =====

ers/validators they can have limited incentives to support it. Bier (2021) details the
ﬁght among Bitcoin developers about the Bitcoin protocol parameters that occurred
in 2015-2017 and provides additional insights into challenges that come with forking a
competing blockchain.
4.4. Governance
The promoters of cryptocurrencies often highlight the idea that the blockchain
ledger removes the need for a trusted third party in the execution of contracts. How-
ever, this does not mean that the system can function completely devoid of any hu-
man intervention. Even if the execution of transactions and smart contracts on the
blockchain are automated, the rules governing the blockchain itself and any upgrades
to the system must be agreed upon and implemented by its participants. These rules
deﬁne the governance of the system and in turn how it represents the interest of its
diﬀerent stake holders.
The major stakeholders in a blockchain eco-system are ﬁrst the core developers
who are charged with writing and updating the code that runs the blockchain. The
validators who verify transactions and ensure the integrity of the blockchain are the
second set of stake holders. Often, they decide if they want to adopt the changes
provided by the developers. The third important group are the token holders. We can
think of these as investors or equity holders. Finally, the forth group are users of the
platform. On some platforms, the third and the fourth groups are the same people.
While all stakeholders have an interest of making the cryptocurrency they are en-
gaged with succeed and grow, their incentives are not always completely aligned. For
example, the users and developers might want fees on the blockchain to be low to make
utilization more attractive, while investors and validators want to maximize the return
on their ﬁnancial investments. Stakeholders might also diﬀer in their non-pecuniary
beneﬁts, e.g. some participants might be willing to forgo economic beneﬁts for other
objectives such as maintaining the independence or purity of the blockchain or possibly
to undermine other blockchains as discussed before.
Thus, the classic problems in governance apply also to the crypto universe: Rules
have to be set to facilitate coordination and provide incentives to adopt value increasing
investments; and to prevent minority stakeholders from being expropriated by powerful
insiders. Providers of capital are particularly prone to expropriation, since once the
investment is made they do not have continued value added or recourse to the ﬁrm.
Corporate governance has been a prominent issue probably as long as organizations
exist; in academic research the topic has attracted an enormous body of research
34

===== PAGE 37 =====

at least since the publication of Berle and Means’ famous book in 1932. 26 While
there is signiﬁcant heterogeneity across countries in the speciﬁc corporate governance
rules, academic research has shown that private solutions even in competitive ﬁnancial
markets cannot generally resolve governance issues, and the recourse to the legal system
is a crucial prerequisite for a well functioning ﬁnancial system, see for example La Porta
et al. (2000).
But this reliance on legal enforcement clashes with the maxim of decentralized
ﬁnance that tries to avoid placing trust in any actor or institution, including the legal
ones. In response to this challenge, decentralized ﬁnance has tried to develop a new
form of governance, so-called decentralized autonomous organization (DAO). The basic
idea of DAO is to spread control over decisions among all interested stakeholders. This
is done by issuing special “governance” tokens that give their holders the power to
propose changes to the protocol and vote on them. All activity is governed by smart
contracts and recorded on the blockchain. In most DeFi applications one governance
token equals a vote and new proposals are implemented according to a predeﬁned
majority rule. To ensure that the holders of governance tokens have an interest in the
success of the platform long term, protocols often channel a share of the network’s
transaction fees into the wallets of the governance token holders. The tokens may also
carry non-governance rights, like the right to be exchanged for certain other tokens
at predeﬁned rates. A famous example of DAO is MakerDAO. 27 Here is how DAO is
explained on the Ethereum website: 28
“Starting an organization with someone that involves funding and money requires
a lot of trust in the people you are working with. But it is hard to trust someone
you have only ever interacted with on the Internet. With DAOs you do not need to
trust anyone else in the group, just the DAO’s code, which is 100% transparent and
veriﬁable by anyone.”
But while a transparent and veriﬁable governance process is certainly an important
ﬁrst step, it does not necessarily ensure good governance. Any DAO design faces the
same fundamental trade-oﬀs and issues as traditional organizations. First, decision
making in a fully decentralized organization can be ineﬃcient. When the ownership is
dispersed and stakes are small no owner might ﬁnd it in their interest to spend eﬀort
and invest in learning about all the complexities needed to make a decision. As a result,
many stakeholders might refrain from voting or lend their votes to a party that is trying
to amass voting rights for self-interested reasons. Second, there is always a danger that
investors with large stakes (blockholders) can capture the control and impose their
26For an overview see Hermalin and Weisbach (2017).
27https://makerdao.com/en/governance.
28https://ethereum.org/en/dao/.
35

===== PAGE 38 =====

preference on the system. Recognizing this problem, corporate laws usually impose
strict disclosure rules on blockholders. Emulating similar rules on a public permission-
less blockchain would be challenging since everyone can control multiple anonymous
accounts. Third, the voting system can give more power to participants, who may only
be interested in maximizing short term proﬁts as opposed to developing the protocol
towards innovative use cases.29 These arguments are very similar to the debate about
investor short-termism in traditional governance, see Roe (2020).
Not surprisingly, the crypto space is abundant with colorful examples of governance
issues.30 Ultimately, the majority of insiders recognizes the inherent tensions posed by
greater decentralization. Figure 6 shows that in the majority of crypto projects, devel-
opers and early investors chose to keep control of the platform by allocating signiﬁcant
stakes to themselves. In addition, even if developers do not have a large stake, in many
cases they managed to maintain de facto signiﬁcant control over the platform, e.g.,
Vitalik Buterin who has been dubbed the “benevolent dictator for life.” 31
[Fig. 6 About Here]
There has been little evidence so far to suggest that the crypto space can success-
fully resolve governance issues without relying on some oﬀ-chain mechanisms. Given
that governance issues of blockchain platforms and traditional ﬁnancial ﬁrms are not
materially diﬀerent, it is very likely that robust governance mechanisms will require
the support of external regulation.
The history of corporate governance demonstrates that simply providing incentives
for managers or investors, might not be suﬃcient to deter bad actors if the ﬁnancial
gains from misbehavior are large. As the implementation of governance rules in the US
has shown, the ability for personal accountability of managers and directors is centrally
important, see Bartlett and Talley (2017). Fiduciary duties that hold corporate agents
personally accountable play a critical role in the enforcement of governance rules. The
idea is that the threat of punishment creates disincentives from fraudulent behavior,
where just losing some money from fraud would not have the same eﬀect.
The pseudonymous nature of the permissionless blockchain environment, however,
can make it diﬃcult to hold bad actors accountable for their actions in the same way.
29In fact, many recent attacks on DeFi apps exploited the possibility of taking over the voting
mechanism to divert funds to the attacker, see for examplehttps://www.wsj.com/articles/crypto-
thieves-get-bolder-by-the-heist-stealing-record-amounts-11650582598.
30See, for example, Bier (2021) and an attempted hostile takeover of Steem: https://decrypt.co/
38050/steem-steemit-tron-justin-sun-cryptocurrency-war.
31https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Benevolent_dictator_for_life. Vitalik Buterin has also
been one of the prominent critics of the DAO. See, for example, https://vitalik.ca/general/
2021/08/16/voting3.html.
36

===== PAGE 39 =====

4.5. Systemic risk
One of the main sources of systemic risk in the traditional ﬁnancial system is the
reliance on fractional reserve banking. When banks take deposits from the public they
only need to hold a fraction of these deposits in liquid assets as a reserve and can lend
the remainder out to borrowers. The goal of a fractional reserve system is to expand
economic activities in the economy by freeing capital for lending. It permits banks to
use the majority of the deposits to generate returns in the form of interest rates on
loans. The eﬃciency, however, comes at a cost of possible bank failures and runs.
DeFi so far has been operating under a narrow banking model, where every loan is
overcollateralized.32 Narrow banking removes many of the problems faced by fractional
reserve systems, but it also constrains the eﬃcient use of capital. The main risk
comes from the ability of investors to take leveraged positions and a potential run on
stablecoins.
A run on stablecoins can occur for a number of reasons. For stablecoins backed
by traditional assets a run can happen for similar reasons to a run on bank or money
market funds. In the absence of timely information about reserves, if investors doubt
the quality of the collateral, they have an incentive to exchange the stablecoin for cash,
causing a run unless the stablecoin is backed one-for-one with liquid assets like cash
or short-term Treasuries. Possible solutions range from issuing stablecoins through
insured banks, requiring stablecoins to be backed one-for-one with safe assets, to es-
tablishing a central bank digital currency. For a detailed discussion of the regulation
of stablecoins and the trade-oﬀs between private and central bank digital currencies,
see Gorton and Zhang (2021) and Gorton (2021).
The situation is more complex in the case of algorithmic stablecoins that rely on
intricate designs meant to help maintain the peg. Here the issue is less about trans-
parency or misreporting because the design of a stablecoin is public knowledge and
all transactions are recorded on the blockchain. Rather the main concern is about the
complexity and potential fragility of the system. Since algorithmic stablecoins are not
fully backed by safe assets, it is reasonable to expect that irrespective of a particular
design, there always exist states of the world where the peg is broken and there can be
a run on the stablecoin. The available documentation of stablecoins universally lacks
rigorous analysis and contains only claims that the design is robust, which as the case
of Iron Finance’s Titanium proves can just be wishful thinking. 33
32There have been isolated examples of undercollateralized loans. See https://medium.com/
coinmonks/the-current-state-of-undercollateralized-defi-lending-2021-1f84e14527b5
for an overview of the current solutions.
33https://forkast.news/iron-finances-defi-bank-run-why-mark-cuban-got-rekted/.
37

===== PAGE 40 =====

The ability to establish highly leveraged positions is another source of systemic
risk. The crypto eco-system is famous for its wide range of highly leveraged products,
with many exchanges oﬀering up to 100X leverage for perpetual derivative contracts.34
Figure A.8 in the Appendix shows that starting from July 2021 volume in crypto
derivatives dominated the volume in spot markets. High leverage exacerbates volatility
and as many industry observers believe is responsible for strong de-leveraging cycles
and associated sharp drops in the cryptocurrency prices. 35
DeFi adds an additional complication to the picture. Many DeFi protocols facilitate
leverage and accept other protocols’ tokens as collateral. Even though every smart
contract and transaction are recorded on a blockchain, and therefore, in theory, could be
analyzed, in practice multiple interconnecting contracts interacting with pseudonymous
accounts result in a highly complex, and potentially fragile system. This fragility could
potentially be acerbated if some critical smart contracts have unintended coding bugs.
5. Regulation
As discussed several times before in this article, the new ﬁnancial architecture
proposed by cryptocurrencies and decentralized ﬁnance, presents formidable challenges
for regulators. Regulations of ﬁnancial assets and services typically have three broad
goals: (1) prevent the use of funds for illicit activities, money laundering or tax evasion;
(2) protect participants in ﬁnancial markets against fraud and abuses; (3) and ensure
the integrity of markets and payment systems and overall ﬁnancial stability.
Our discussion in Section 4 highlights that at present DeFi solutions do not comply
with the above three goals. If society does not want to give up on ensuring these
goals, some form of technological and regulatory solution seems desirable. In the
response to the rise of cryptocurrencies, diﬀerent countries have followed vastly diﬀerent
approaches. For example, China oﬃcially banned trading in cryptocurrencies and
developed its own central bank digital currency, while El Salvador allowed Bitcoin
as legal tender. In the US the regulatory environment is still in ﬂux and there are
overlapping responsibilities and sometimes even contradictory approaches.
However, there is urgency to provide a clearer regulatory framework for at least
two reasons. First, regulatory certainty is always important for entrepreneurs and in-
vestors who wish to decide whether and how to participate in new technologies. Second,
34See, e.g., https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-01-26/wild-crypto-leverage-
on-offer-for-pros-in-20-times-bitcoin-bet.
35https://insidebitcoins.com/news/how-crypto-derivatives-crashed-the-market-do-
prices-signal-buy-now, https://bitcoinmagazine.com/markets/leverage-in-derivates-
market-dipped-bitcoin-price.
38

===== PAGE 41 =====

the exponential growth of cryptocurrencies can lead to a situation where the political
economy of regulation becomes very diﬃcult, if regulators wait too long. In eﬀect,
cryptocurrencies and DeFi applications can become too-big-to-regulate. We showed in
Section 4 that currently many DeFi solutions do not bear the full cost of the external-
ities they impose on the economy, such as enforcing KYC or AML laws or complying
with tax reporting. Part of the current valuation of some cryptocurrencies and DeFi
applications might even be based on an expectation that they will not have to ever
comply with these regulations. Thus, requiring DeFi solutions to start internalizing
these costs will likely result in losses for some of the current investors. As a result,
any such proposals are usually met with strong resistance by the crypto community.
This puts regulators in a diﬃcult position. While they need to safeguard the ﬁnancial
system, in a democracy there is often populist pressure to forgo doing the things that
are good in the longer run to satisfy short run goals. In fact, the losses might be blamed
on the regulatory action itself, rather than the attempt by regulators to prevent even
larger losses for society going forward.
The main challenges in regulating cryptocurrencies stem from the pseudonymous
and jurisdiction-free nature of this new architecture, which is a consequence of the use
of permissionless blockchain protocols and the smart contracts running on them. The
traditional ﬁnancial architecture where access runs through centralized intermediaries
allows each country to determine its own regulatory framework and decide for example,
who can open a bank account, what documentation must be supplied, or how informa-
tion can be collected and stored. Also, as the recent geopolitical experience between
Russia and the West shows, the traditional system makes it possible to restrict the
ﬁnancial system of one country from accessing the ﬁnancial system of other countries.
The anonymous and permissionless nature of DeFi apps and the underlying blockchain
protocols have the potential to remove the boundaries between the ﬁnancial systems
of diﬀerent countries or even enable citizens to transact in an eco-system that is com-
pletely outside of government regulation or tax enforcement. While ﬁnancial integra-
tion can have beneﬁts through better risk sharing or improved liquidity it can also have
large costs, if poorly regulated systems undercut better regulated ones in a race to the
bottom. This becomes especially prevalent if diﬀerent ﬁnancial systems operate with
vastly diﬀerent standards.
So what are the available options for regulators? While a complete discussion of all
dimensions of regulation is beyond the scope of this paper, we outline a few key options
for rule-makers. A natural place for regulatory oversight in this new eco-system is at
the level of developers and validators, which in turn control the network protocol. Once
this level of regulatory compliance is established, many other functions can be built. In
39

===== PAGE 42 =====

particular, separate entities can be established that would be responsible for verifying
the identities and certifying that crypto addresses belong to conﬁrmed users. These
entities should be subject to regular audits. The protocols can be adjusted so that
validators can check if a particular address belongs to a certiﬁed entity and validators
would be charged with only processing transactions that involve certiﬁed addresses.
In addition, one could imagine that customers can also be provided with private
keys based on their characteristics, such as ﬁnancial wealth or sophistication. Smart
contracts can be ranked based on their safety, risk, etc. Rules can be established that
would allow diﬀerent smart contract categories to interact with customers who can
provide the required key. Smart contracts can be designed to automate the ranking
of other smart contracts and automate the generation of private keys. Cryptography
algorithms can be developed to guard customers privacy. Transitioning to this model
will likely require some time and development of new solutions. Therefore, it would be
important to lay out an appropriate timeline and deadlines so that market participants
can prepare for a smooth transition.
Since countries might diﬀer in how they want to structure their regulatory envi-
ronment for validators, each country can opt to run its own version of the blockchain.
But if some countries agree broadly on regulatory standards, they can use the same
blockchain. Countries that choose to run separate versions of the blockchain can inter-
act with others using interoperability mechanisms such as bridges. The above solution
can be more easily applied to new blockchains. But, if a majority of large countries
agree on coordinated regulation then even the existing blockchains can be brought into
a legal framework without the need to break them up into separate sidechains based
on diﬀerent regulatory requirements.
The above solution looks similar to a permissioned blockchain, but this system
preserves most of the desired properties of the original design of cryptocurrencies, e.g.,
transactions can be observable on the blockchain, settlement is immediate, and the
same set of smart contracts can be executed on it. In addition, if many countries agree
on regulation validators can be elected so that no country has a monopoly over the
networks. The ability to regulate validators can potentially change the enforcement of
smart contracts, by allowing recourse to the contracting parties. But as we discussed
in Section 2 it can have a positive eﬀect on eﬃciency.
In contrast, if regulators give up on the ability to oversee validators, the eﬀective-
ness of regulation will be much more limited and will depend on the goodwill and
voluntary cooperation of validators and developers of the blockchain. If validators ac-
cept transactions from every party, the most regulators can hope for is to separate the
network into “regulated” and “unregulated” parts. This could be done by requiring,
40

===== PAGE 43 =====

say, US citizens to interact only with certiﬁed DeFi apps, which comply with KYC and
AML regulations and provide reports on trades, tax compliance or other activities.
The relative size of the regulated and unregulated networks will depend on the relative
investment opportunities in these two networks and the ease of moving funds between
them. The problem of regulating compliance only at the level of DApps is that ﬁrst,
many citizens even from countries that try to regulate DeFi applications, could still
ﬁnd it attractive to invest funds in the unregulated network to avoid paying taxes,
etc. The ability to evade compliance, can provide a large subsidy for the unregulated
part of DeFi apps. Second, since regulation will have generally a limited bite on the
unregulated part it can harbor many bad actors and facilitate illegal activities. The
opportunities of sidestepping the regulated part will generally increase with the level of
crypto-adoption, since people will be able to predominately interact in the unregulated
part and avoid triggering regulatory compliance.
6. Conclusion
In this article we provide an introduction of how the new DeFi architecture works
and the mechanics behind it. We also lay out some of the potential beneﬁts and
challenges of the developing new system and present a comparison to the traditional
system of ﬁnancial intermediation. In our discussion we focus on the economic forces
and frictions that can arise within this system and the regulatory approaches that might
help to mitigate the problems. Our analysis highlights that while the DeFi architecture
might have the potential to reduce transaction costs, it is not an automatic solution to
the problem of rents in the ﬁnancial sector. But it may also create additional problems.
We identify as a key challenge to regulators, the permissionless and anonymous nature
of the current DeFi blockchains. These provide the opportunity for market participants
to circumvent controls in the ﬁnancial system, and create externalities for the rest of
society, for example through facilitating tax evasion or skirting of AML laws.
We highlight that there are ways to regulate the DeFi system which would preserve
a majority of features of the blockchain architecture but support accountability and
regulatory compliance. These solutions would rely on a system where validators on
the blockchain agree to check if a particular address belongs to a certiﬁed entity and
validators would be charged with only processing transactions that involve certiﬁed
addresses.
How this system evolves, in terms of technology and regulation has important con-
sequences for liquidity and credit provision to the economy, and ultimately the standing
of the US and other global economies. There are also strategic and competitive im-
41

===== PAGE 44 =====

plications across countries. The US obtains signiﬁcant economic and strategic beneﬁts
from the central role that the dollar and the US ﬁnancial system hold internationally.
Therefore, it is in the US interest to encourage innovation and modern ﬁnancial tech-
nologies but at the same time to set standards that protect consumers and maintain
the transparency, accountability and stability of the system. The cross-jurisdictional
structure of permissionless blockchain ledgers entails a danger that participants will
engage in regulatory arbitrage which would undermine the ﬁnancial system and its
stability. Coordination between the main ﬁnancial markets will be important to pre-
vent a hollowing-out of ﬁnancial regulations.
42

===== PAGE 45 =====

References
Allen, F., Carletti, E., and Gu, X. (2019). The Roles of Banks in Financial Systems.
In Berger, A. N., Molyneux, P., and Wilson, J. O. S., editors, The Oxford Handbook
of Banking, Oxford Handbooks. Oxford University Press, 3rd edition.
Aoyagi, J. (2020). Liquidity Provision by Automated Market Makers. Available at
SSRN 3674178.
Aoyagi, J. and Ito, Y. (2021). Liquidity Implication of Constant Product Market
Makers. Available at SSRN 3808755.
Aramonte, S., Huang, W., and Schrimpf, A. (2021). DeFi risks and the decentralisation
illusion. BIS Quarterly Review .
Auer, R. and Claessens, S. (2020). Cryptocurrency Market Reactions to Regulatory
News. Globalization Institute Working Paper 381, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.
Bartlett, R. and Talley, E. (2017). Law and Corporate Governance. In The Handbook
of the Economics of Corporate Governance, volume 1, pages 177–234. Elsevier.
Beniiche, A. (2020). A Study of Blockchain Oracles. arXiv:2004.07140.
Berg, T., Puri, M., and Rocholl, J. (2020). Loan Oﬃcer Incentives, Internal Rating
Models, and Default Rates. Review of Finance , 24(3):529–578.
Biais, B., Bisiere, C., Bouvard, M., and Casamatta, C. (2019). The blockchain folk
theorem. The Review of Financial Studies , 32(5):1662–1715.
Bier, J. (2021). The Blocksize War: The Battle Over Who Controls Bitcoin ’s Protocol
Rules. Independently Published.
Boot, A. W. A. and Thakor, A. V. (2015). Financial System Architecture. The Review
of Financial Studies, 10(3):693–733.
Budish, E. (2018). The Economic Limits of Bitcoin and the Blockchain. Working Paper
24717, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Caldarelli, G. and Ellul, J. (2021). The Blockchain Oracle Problem in Decentralized
Finance—A Multivocal Approach. Applied Sciences, 11(16).
Campbell, J. Y. (2016). Restoring rational choice: The challenge of consumer ﬁnancial
regulation. American Economic Review, 106(5):1–30.
43

===== PAGE 46 =====

Capponi, A. and Jia, R. (2021). The Adoption of Blockchain-based Decentralized
Exchanges. arXiv:2103.08842.
C´ el´ erier, C. and Vall´ ee, B. (2017). Catering to Investors Through Security Design:
Headline Rate and Complexity. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(3):1469–
1508.
Cong, L. W. and He, Z. (2019). Blockchain Disruption and Smart Contracts. The
Review of Financial Studies , 32(5):1754–1797.
Cong, L. W., He, Z., and Li, J. (2020). Decentralized Mining in Centralized Pools. The
Review of Financial Studies , 34(3):1191–1235.
Cong, L. W. and Xiao, Y. (2021). Categories and Functions of Crypto-Tokens. In
Pompella, M. and Matousek, R., editors, The Palgrave Handbook of FinTech and
Blockchain, pages 267–284. Springer.
Ferreira, D., Li, J., and Nikolowa, R. (2019). Corporate Capture of Blockchain Gover-
nance. Working Paper 593, European Corporate Governance Institute (ECGI).
Gorton, G. B. (2021). The Orkney Slew and Central Bank Digital Currencies.Available
at SSRN 3937323.
Gorton, G. B. and Zhang, J. (2021). Taming Wildcat Stablecoins. Available at SSRN
3888752.
Halaburda, H., He, Z., and Li, J. (2021). An economic model of consensus on distributed
ledgers. Working Paper 29515, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Harvey, C. R. (2016). Cryptoﬁnance. Available at SSRN 2438299.
Harvey, C. R., Ramachandran, A., and Santoro, J. (2021). DeFi and the Future of
Finance. John Wiley & Sons, Newark.
Hermalin, B. and Weisbach, M. (2017). The Handbook of the Economics of Corporate
Governance. Elsevier.
Huberman, G., Leshno, J. D., and Moallemi, C. (2021). Monopoly without a Monopo-
list: An Economic Analysis of the Bitcoin Payment System. The Review of Economic
Studies, 88(6):3011–3040.
Kogias, E. K., Jovanovic, P., Gailly, N., Khoﬃ, I., Gasser, L., and Ford, B. (2016).
Enhancing Bitcoin Security and Performance with Strong Consistency via Collective
44

===== PAGE 47 =====

Signing. In Proceedings of the 25th USENIX Conference on Security Symposium ,
SEC’16, pages 279–296. USENIX Association.
La Porta, R., de Silanes, F. L., Shleifer, A., and Vishny, R. (2000). Investor Protection
and Corporate Governance. Journal of Financial Economics , 58(1):3–27.
Laibson, D., Repetto, A., and Tobacman, J. (2007). Estimating Discount Functions
with Consumption Choices over the Lifecycle. Working Paper 13314, National Bu-
reau of Economic Research.
Lehar, A. and Parlour, C. A. (2021). Decentralized Exchanges. Available at SSRN
3905316. Working paper, University of Calgary and University of California, Berke-
ley.
Lusardi, A. and Mitchell, O. S. (2007). Financial Literacy and Retirement Prepared-
ness: Evidence and Implications for Financial Education. Business Economics,
42(1):35–44.
Makarov, I. and Schoar, A. (2021). Blockchain Analysis of the Bitcoin Market. Working
Paper 29396, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Merton, R. C. (1995). A Functional Perspective of Financial Intermediation. Financial
Management, 24(2):23–41.
Platt, M., Sedlmeir, J., Platt, D., Tasca, P., Xu, J., Vadgama, N., and Iba˜ nez, J. I.
(2021). Energy Footprint of Blockchain Consensus Mechanisms Beyond Proof-of-
Work. arXiv:2109.03667.
Prasad, E. S. (2021). The Future of Money: How the Digital Revolution is Transforming
Currencies and Finance . Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Roe, M. J. (2020). Stock Market Short-Termism’s Impact. Law Working Paper
426/2018, European Corporate Governance Institute (ECGI).
Ru, H. and Schoar, A. (2016). Do Credit Card Companies Screen for Behavioral Biases?
Working Paper 22360, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Sch¨ ar, F. (2021). Decentralized Finance: On Blockchain- and Smart Contract-Based
Financial Markets. Review, 103(2):153–174.
Werbach, K. (2018). The Blockchain and the New Architecture of Trust . The MIT
Press.
45

===== PAGE 48 =====

Werbach, K. and Cornell, N. (2017). Contracts Ex Machina. Duke Law Journal ,
67:313–382.
Wright, A. and De Filippi, P. (2015). Decentralized Blockchain Technology and the
Rise of Lex Cryptographia. Available at SSRN 2580664.
46

===== PAGE 49 =====

Figures
Figure 1: Average transaction fee and price for Bitcoin and Ethereum. This ﬁgure shows
the daily transaction fees and closing prices for Bitcoin and Ethereum from January 2017 to February
2022. Daily closing prices are plotted on the left-axis and daily average transaction fees are plotted
on the right axis. The ﬁgures are plotted in log-scale. Data source: Messari.io. Authors’ calculations.
Figure 2: Share of market capitalization by token categories. This ﬁgure shows the share of
market capitalization by seven categories of cryptocurrency tokens and coins (here we collectively refer
to them as tokens) as of February 2022. Smart Contract Platform include tokens for platforms that
host smart contracts on their own blockchains. Stablecoin refers to tokens that are pegged to a speciﬁc
asset such as ﬁat currency. dApp includes tokens used for diﬀerent decentralized application protocols.
NFT refers to non-fungible tokens. Other refers to the rest of the cryptocurrency tokens that cannot
be classiﬁed to the categories listed above. Data source: CoinGecko. Authors’ calculations.
47

===== PAGE 50 =====

Figure 3: Share of market capitalization by stablecoin categories. These ﬁgures show the
share of market capitalization by stablecoin categories as of February 2022. Panel A shows the share
of stablecoins backed by traditional assets comparing to those backed by crypto-assets. Stablecoins
backed by crypto-assets include those algorithmically backed by a particular cryptocurrency or by
multiple tokens such as tokens in a liquidity pool. Panel B shows the share of top stablecoins backed
by traditional assets. Panel C shows the share of top stablecoins backed by crypto-assets. Data source:
CoinGecko. Authors’ calculations.
Figure 4: Market capitalization and total value locked of decentralized ﬁnance. These
ﬁgures show the market capitalization and total value locked for diﬀerent categories of decentralized
ﬁnance from January 2019 to February 2022. Trading refers to tokens used in decentralized exchanges
including those for spot trade and derivative exchanges. Lending and borrowing refers to DeFi plat-
forms where lenders add funds into liquidity pools in return for a regular interest rate from borrowers.
Yield Farming includes yield aggregators and protocols that incentive people to deposit or lend out
their tokens in exchange of rewards. Panel A shows the market capitalization of the tokens in billion
USD and Panel B shows the total value locked in billion USD. Data source: market capitalization data
comes from CoinGecko and total value locked data comes from Deﬁ Llama. Authors’ calculations.
48

===== PAGE 51 =====

Figure 5: Market capitalization and total value locked of decentralized lending. These
ﬁgures show the market capitalization and total value locked for the top 20 lending protocols based
on market capitalization from May 2020 to February 2022. Panel A shows the market capitalization
of the tokens in billion USD and Panel B shows the total value locked in billion USD. Data source:
market capitalization data comes from CoinGecko and total value locked data comes from Deﬁ Llama.
Authors’ calculations.
Figure 6: Initial Coin Oﬀering Insider Share. This ﬁgure shows the insider shares from top 50
tokens’ ICOs. Insider share includes tokens to founding teams and developers, early investors such as
seed investors, venture capital ﬁrms, and private sale investors, and associated entities which include
companies that are related to the protocols or protocol founders. Insiders shares do not include shares
that go into the community such as airdrops, grants, rewards, and tokens to public sale investors,
and shares for the development of protocols, such as those going into foundations and reserves. Data
source: Messari.io. Authors’ calculations.
49

===== PAGE 52 =====

Table 1: Concentration of validator stakes
This table reports the concentration of validator stakes for the top ten proof-of-stake
smart contract platforms by market capitalization as of February 2022. Validator stakes
include stakes provided by validator themselves and stakes delegated to validators.
Column 2 shows the amount staked as a percentage of circulating supply. Column 3
and 4 show the amount staked for the top 10 and 50 validators as a share of total
amount staked on the platform. The data exclude Ethereum since it is in a transition
period. Data source: Stakingrewards.com and author’s calculations.
Cryptocurrency Amount staked as a (%)
of circulating supply
Validator Concentration
top 10 top 50
Solana 70% 23% 56%
Cardano 73% 30% 47%
Avalanche 97% 17% 57%
Terra 77% 36% 76%
Polkadot 57% 30% 56%
Cosmos Hub 63% 45% 87%
NEAR Protocol 61% 50% 96%
Polygon 34% 72% 99%
Fantom 54% 88% 100%
Tezos 76% 63% 96%
50

===== PAGE 53 =====

Table 2: Top validators
This table reports the top 15 PoS validators and their aggregate stakes in the top ten
proof-of-stake smart contract platforms by market capitalization as of February 2022.
Validator stakes include stakes provided by validator themselves and stakes delegated
to validators. Column 2 shows the aggregate dollar amount staked. Column 3 shows
validators market share. Data source: Stakingrewards.com and author’s calculations.
Validator Staked USD Share
Everstake 2.8 B 2.20%
Binance Staking 2.6 B 2.10%
Chorus One 1.6 B 1.30%
Dokia Capital 1.6 B 1.30%
Certus One 1.5 B 1.20%
Bison Trails 1.5 B 1.20%
Allnodes 1.5 B 1.20%
InfStones 1.5 B 1.20%
Kraken 1.4 B 1.10%
Staked 1.2 B 1.00%
P2P Validator 1.2 B 1.00%
Orion.Money 1.1 B 0.90%
B-Harvest 1.0 B 0.80%
Staking Facilities 1.0 B 0.80%
Figment 1.0 B 0.80%
51

===== PAGE 54 =====

Appendix
Figures
Figure A.1: Market capitalization of top non-smart contract cryptocurrencies. These
ﬁgures show the market capitalization of top non-smart contract cryptocurrencies and the rest from
January 2019 to February 2022. The top seven cryptocurrencies include Bitcoin, Dogecoin, Litecoin,
Bitcoin Cash, Dash, and Decdred. Panel A shows the market capitalization of the tokens in billion
USD and the Panel B shows their corresponding percentages as a share of market capitalization for
all cryptocurrencies. Data source: CoinGecko. Authors’ calculations.
Figure A.2: Market capitalization of top smart contract platforms. These ﬁgures show
the market capitalization of top ﬁve smart contract platforms and the rest from January 2019 to
February 2022. The coins for the top ﬁve smart contract platforms are Ethereum, Binance Coin,
Solana, Cardano, and Polkadot. Panel A shows the market capitalization of the tokens in billion USD
and the Panel B shows their corresponding percentages as a share of market capitalization for all
smart contract platforms. Data source: CoinGecko. Authors’ calculations.
52

===== PAGE 55 =====

Figure A.3: Total value locked on top smart contract platforms. This ﬁgure shows the
multi-chain total value locked by top smart contract platforms from January 2021 to February 2022.
Data source: Deﬁ Llama. Authors’ calculations.
Figure A.4: Daily spot trade volume for centralized exchanges compared to decentralized
exchanges. This ﬁgure shows the daily spot trade volume for centralized and decentralized exchanges
from January 2020 to February 2022. The ﬁgure is plotted in log-scale. Data source: The Block.
Authors’ calculations.
53

===== PAGE 56 =====

CoinGecko 2021 Year End Cryptocurrency Report
45%
50% 55% 55% 51% 53% 55% 52% 48% 48% 48% 43%
18%
16%
16% 18%
18% 15% 12%
12%
11% 9% 8%
7%
13%
13%
13% 14%
13% 12% 12%
12%
12%
11% 12%
14%
10% 8%
7% 5%
8% 7% 7% 8%
9%
10% 10%
9%
6% 5% 6%
8%
3.23% 4.21% 4.22% 4.95%
4.71% 4.54% 5.31%
3% 3% 4% 5% 6%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
Binance Huobi OKEx Coinbase Crypto.com FTX KuCoin Kraken Bitfinex Gate.io Bitmart Gemini
42
2021 Top 10 Centralized Exchanges (CEX) 
CEXes trading volume climbed slightly before dipping further in December
Data source: CoinGecko
Top-10 CEX as of 1 July 2021 – Binance, Huobi, Coinbase, Crypto.com, FTX, OKEx, Kraken, Bitfinex, Bitmart, Gemini
Top-10 CEX as of 1 January 2022 – Binance, Huobi, Coinbase, Crypto.com, FTX, OKEx, KuCoin, Kraken, Bitfinex, Gate.io
Total Trading Volume ($ Trillion)
$1.2T
 $1.4T
 $2.3T
 $3.2T
 $1.3T
 $0.8T
 $1.4T
 $1.8T
$1.6T
 $1.8T
 $2.1T
Top 10 CEX Trading Volume Breakdown in 2021
Remarkably, Crypto.com has emerged as 
the quarter's biggest dark horse, 
increasing its market share from an 
average of 0.5% per month in the first 
half of 2021 to 7.8% in December.
Top-10 centralized exchanges recorded a 
total of $5.55 trillion spot trading 
volume in Q4 2021. Q4 peaked at $2.07 
trillion in November before falling to $1.64 
trillion in December (-21%).
+36%
Top 10 CEX Total Trading Volume 
Growth from Q3 to Q4 2021
Binance’s market share fell to 42.7% at 
the end of Q4 as global regulatory scrutiny 
on the exchange continued.
Huobi’s market share shrank by nearly 
50% in Q4, ending the quarter with a 7% 
share by volume among the top-10 CEXs.
$1.6TMarket
Share
CoinGecko 2021 Year End Cryptocurrency Report 43
2021 Top 10 Decentralized Exchanges (DEX) 
Trading volumes of Top 10 DEXes skyrocketed at the end of the year
Data source: CoinGecko
Top-10 DEX as of 1 November 2021 – Uniswap (v3), Uniswap (v2), PancakeSwap (v2), SushiSwap, Trader Joe, Raydium, Curve, SpookySwap, Orca, Compound Finance
Top-10 DEX as of 1 December 2021 – Uniswap (v3), Uniswap (v2), PancakeSwap (v2), SushiSwap, Trader Joe, Raydium, Curve, SpookySwap, Compound Finance, QuickSwap
Refer to CoinGecko Quarterly Report Q2 2021 and Quaterly Report Q3 2021 for Top-10 decentralized exchanges rebalances from January to September
Since launch, Trader Joe has expanded its 
market share quickly, while Sushiswap’s
market share has notably declined.  
Top 10 DEXes spot trading volume in Q4 
2021 recorded a total of $522 billion in 
trading volume.
+67%
Top 10 DEXes Total Trading 
Volume Growth from Q3 to Q4 
2021
DEXes volumes skyrocketed in 
November and December where it 
jumped from $123B in Sept to $196B and 
$187B respectively.
9%
28%
37% 33% 32% 31% 29%
40%39% 37% 40%
30%
19%
10%
15%
12% 12% 12% 13%
7%
20%
25%
32%
14%
47% 33% 9%
17% 17% 19% 26% 19%
17%
15%
10%
7% 8%
6%
8% 9% 10%
12%
8%
6%
8%
5% 5%
4% 4%
4%
7% 5% 4%
5% 4%
4%
10%
10% 8%
5% 5%
7% 12% 9% 8%
7% 5% 8% 8%
11%
7% 6% 5%
4%
5% 8% 13%
5%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
Orca
Spookyswap
Compound
Pangolin
 0x
 Bancor
 Dodo
 WaultSwap
Raydium
 SushiSwap
 PancakeSwap V1
 Uniswap V2
 Uniswap V3
Market
Share
Total Trading Volume ($ Trillion)
77B
 101B
 167B
 309B
 161B
 119B
72B
 123B
97B
 139B
 196B
 187B
Uniswap maintained its position as the 
top DEX (V2 and V3 protocol), with 44.1% 
market share through out Q4 2021
Top 10 DEX Trading Volume Breakdown in 2021
Figure A.5: Exchange concentration. These ﬁgures show the top decentralized exchanges (DEX)
and centralized exchanges’ (CEX) monthly trading volume concentration in 2021. Data source:
CoinGecko Yearly Report 2021.
54

===== PAGE 57 =====

Figure A.6: Tokens supplied and borrowed. This ﬁgure shows the aggregated deposit and
borrowing of the top 15 tokens for the top three lending protocols in million USD: Aave, MakerDAO,
and Compound as of February 25, 2022. Data source: protocol statistics. Authors’ calculations.
https://app.aave.com/markets, https://compound.finance/markets, https://daistats.com
55

===== PAGE 58 =====

Figure A.7: Platform transaction fees. This ﬁgure shows the total fees and revenues in 2021 for
Level-1 blokchains and two payment networks: Visa and Stripe. Source: The Year in Ethereum 2021:
https://stark.mirror.xyz/q3OnsK7mvfGtTQ72nfoxLyEV5lfYOqUfJIoKBx7BG1I.
Figure A.8: Monthly Spot vs. Derivatives Volume . This ﬁgure shows the monthly spot and
derivatives trade volume in USD from February 2020 to January 2022. Data source: Cryptocompare
Exchange Review, January 2022.
56

===== PAGE 59 =====

T
ables
Table A.1: Blockchain 51% Attacks
Coin
Date Succeeded? Loss in USD After the Attack
Bitcoin
SV
(BSV)
Aug 5, 2021 No \ The BSV team claimed that the attack was thwarted and all fraud-
ulent chains identiﬁed.
Bitcoin SV
(BSV)
Aug 3, 2021 Yes Unknown The BSV team recommended that node operators invalidate the
fraudulent chain. The Bitcoin Association collected evidence of the
illegal activity and its representatives worked with law enforcement
authorities in aﬀected jurisdictions.
Bitcoin SV
(BSV)
Jun 24, 2021 -
Jul 9, 2021
Yes Unknown Several crypto exchanges suspended BSV transactions, deposits and
withdrawals. After the July 6 block reorganization, the BSV team
discovered the malicious nature of the activity, then took mitigat-
ing and preventative measures. The exchange Bitmart later claimed
that the attacker had deposited “fake” BSV, traded them for other
coins, and moved those coins to other exchanges. On July 23, Bit-
mart ﬁled for injunctive relief in the Court seeking to prevent fur-
ther transfers and asking for other exchanges to freeze coins they
received from the attacker. Binance announced a shut-down of its
BSV mining pool scheduled for July 31.
57

===== PAGE 60 =====

Coin
Date Succeeded? Loss in USD After the Attack
V
erge
(XVG)
Feb 15, 2021 No \ Bittrex paused the XVG wallet. The Verge team said the attack
was thwarted and failed.
Firo (FIRO,
formerly
Zcoin)
Jan 18, 2021 Yes $4.5 million but
more than 70% of
the FIRO was
recovered
Exchanges paused deposits and withdrawals. The Firo team issued
an emergency switch to temporarily disable Lelantus to prevent the
attacker from anonymizing funds. They also released a hotﬁx as a
preventive measure on Jan 21, asking all wallets and masternodes
be upgraded. The price of FIRO dropped -16.51% on January 21.
The Firo team locked the attacker’s proceeds and suspected that
this attack was not ﬁnancially motivated. The Firo community
voted to support reimbursing exchanges with the locked funds. The
funds were returned to Binance. The Firo team expedited activa-
tion of ChainLocks, a secondary validation layer, and deloyed it on
Jan 28.
58

===== PAGE 61 =====

Coin
Date Succeeded? Loss in USD After the Attack
Aeternit
y
(AE)
Dec 5, 2020 -
Jan 8, 2021
Yes more than
$5,000,000 but all
the stolen AE
were recovered
later
Huobi timely paused all the AE deposits and withdrawals and
alerted the AE team on Dec 7, shortly after the attacker broad-
casted the new chain. Binance delisted AE on Dec 30. The AE
team found that this attack targeted speciﬁc exchanges (OKEx,
Huobi, Gate.IO and Binance) in their investigations. The AE com-
munity members helped to mitigate the 51% attack by renting
hashing power to mine in the community fork. On Jan 3, the Ae-
ternity Community Telegram group was attacked. The AE team
claimed that they thwarted the attacker’s attempt to roll back ex-
change transactions on Jan 8, and recovered the 29 million stolen
AE tokens. The AE team also announced their plan about imple-
menting Hyperchains, which are PoS systems that rely on existing
PoW blockchains to prevent 51% attacks.
Bitcoin
Cash ABC
(BCHA,
now eCash)
Nov 28, 2020 Yes Unknown Given that the attack was not ﬁnancially motivated but for protest-
ing a new miner tax, the unknown attackers could not sustain this
attack. BCHA’s price was not adversely aﬀected by the attack.
59

===== PAGE 62 =====

Coin
Date Succeeded? Loss in USD After the Attack
Grin
(GRIN)
No
v 7, 2020 Unknown Unknown The motivation for this attack remains unclear. The develop-
ment team put a warning on its website for the sudden increase of
hashrate which coincided with the Nicehash rate doubling outside of
known pools. It also suggested extra conﬁrmations on transactions.
The price of GRIN remained relatively unchanged after the news of
51% threat broke.
Ethereum
Classic
(ETC)
Aug 29, 2020 Yes Unknown The series of attacks had no signiﬁcant impact on the price of ETC.
On Aug 31, the ETC team announced that they would pursue en-
forcement and regulation of hash rental. On Sep 1, NiceHash ac-
knowledged its hash-power rental platform may have facilitated the
attacks. The ETC later implemented an Modiﬁed Exponential Sub-
jective Scoring (MESS) solution to reduce the likelihood of future
51% attacks.
Ethereum
Classic
(ETC)
Aug 6, 2020 Yes Unknown Bitﬂy and Binance reported the block reorganization and halted
ETC transactions, withdrawals, and deposits. The exchange OKEx
said it would consider delisting ETC due to the network’s severe
lack of security. Coinbase extended deposit and withdrawal conﬁr-
mation times for ETC to roughly two weeks. The ETC team an-
nounced a security plan on Aug 19.
60

===== PAGE 63 =====

Coin
Date Succeeded? Loss in USD After the Attack
Ethereum
Classic
(ETC)
Jul
29, 2020 -
Aug 1, 2020
Yes $5,600,000 The blockchain analytics ﬁrm Bitquery reported investigations that
debunked the ETC team’s initial statement of no attack.
Bitcoin
Gold
(BTG)
Jul 1, 2020 No \ Besides warnings, the BTG team privately supplied mining pools
and exchanges with an updated version of the BTG network which
has a checkpoint that automatically rejected the attacker’s chain.
Bitcoin
Gold
(BTG)
Jan 23, 2020 -
Jan 24, 2020
Yes $72,000 BTG’s market price went up about 18 percent over 24 hours after
news of the attack broke. In a white paper, the BTG team pro-
posed a new soft fork approach, Cross-Chain Block Notarization
Protocol, to prevent future 51% attacks.
Vertcoin
(VTC)
Dec 1, 2019 No \ The motivation for this attack remains unclear. Bittrex, possibly
the original target of the attack, disabled its wallet before the reor-
ganized blocks were published, thus prevented the potential double-
spend. The VTC developer blamed Nicehash for their hashpower
rental services.
Expanse
(EXP)
Jul 29, 2019 Yes $12 This attack received little news coverage. Only a former researcher
at the MIT Digital Currency Initiative disclosed it on github.
61

===== PAGE 64 =====

Coin
Date Succeeded? Loss in USD After the Attack
Litecoin
Cash
(LCC)
Jul
4, 2019 -
Jul 7, 2019
Yes $5,500 This attack received little news coverage. Only a former researcher
at the MIT Digital Currency Initiative disclosed it on github.
Ethereum
Classic
(ETC)
Jan 5, 2019 -
Jan 7, 2019
Yes $1,100,000 The ETC team initially claimed there was no attack but later con-
ﬁrmed it. Coinbase published a report on the attack and paused
all ETC transactions, withdrawals and deposits. ETC had a near
10% depreciation on Jan 7. The blockchain security ﬁrm SlowMist
found the attacker returned stolen funds to the YoBit and Gate.io
exchanges on Jan 10.
Vertcoin
(VTC)
Oct 12, 2018 -
Dec 2, 2018
Yes more than
$100,000
Coinbase published a report that provids many details on the time-
line and ﬁnancial losses of this series of attacks. The VTC developer
blamed cloud-mining services such as Nicehash.
AurumCoin
(AU)
Nov 9, 2018 Yes $550,000 The Aurum Coin team put all the blame on the exchange Cryp-
topia, and claimed that the AU team is not responsible to the loss
because AurumCoin is an open-source distributed crypto currency.
Cryptopia did not even acknowledge the loss.
62

===== PAGE 65 =====

Coin
Date Succeeded? Loss in USD After the Attack
Pigeoncoin
(PGN)
Sep
27, 2018 Yes $15,000 The PGN developers patched the bug that was exploited in the at-
tack. Because PGN is a copycat crypto currency, the bug was orig-
inally from the Bitcoin source code which was already ﬁxed on Sep
19. Trading resumed on Oct 2.
Ravencoin
(RVN)
Sep 13, 2018 -
Sep 14, 2018
Yes Unknown The Ravencoin team reported their ﬁndings and solutions on Sep
18. They chose to implement a default maximum reorg depth with
speciﬁc node conditions as a solution to prevent future 51% attacks.
They also released a hotﬁx for a bug that was inherited from Bit-
coin source code which allows double-spend attacks using the chain
on Sep 21.
FLO
Blockchain
(FLO)
Sep 8, 2018 Yes $27,500 Bittrex disabled the wallet after the double-spend and alerted
the FLO team. The FLO team decided to repay the approximate
700,000 FLO stolen from Bittrex and asked the FLO community for
donations. To mitigate 51% attacks and protect the network, the
FLO team initially planned to implement Sunny King’s advanced
checkpointing system, but later chose to add the more applicable
max reorg depth consensus rules to FLO instead of using the cen-
tral checkpoint mechanism.
63

===== PAGE 66 =====

Coin
Date Succeeded? Loss in USD After the Attack
ZenCash
(ZEN,
now
Horizen)
Jun 2, 2018 Yes more than
$600,000
The ZenCash team announced that they had taken mitigating ac-
tions, contacted exchanges to increase conﬁrmation times, and con-
ducted forensic analysis soon after receiving warning from a pool
operator. On June 3, the Zen team released an oﬃcial statement
about the attack on their website.
Litecoin
Cash
(LCC)
May 30, 2018 Yes Unknown The exchange YoBit tweeted that a 51% attack on LCC was iden-
tiﬁed. The LCC team alerted exchanges to increase conﬁrmation
requirements, and announced that there would possibly be a hard
fork. Some news reports implied that the loss was minor in this at-
tack. Later in a white paper, the LCC team proposed a new hybrid
PoW/PoS solution, “The Hive”, that aims to protect the network
against 51% attackers.
Verge
(XVG)
May 22, 2018 Yes more than
$1,700,000
After attackers exploited the same weakness as the previous April
attack, Verge tried to downplay it as a DDos attack on some mining
pools. The price of XVG dropped signiﬁcantly after the attack.
Bitcoin
Gold
(BTG)
May 16, 2018 -
May 19, 2018
Yes $18,000,000 The BTG team updated its mining algorithm in June 2018 in order
to add an immediate measure of safety from 51% attacks. Although
the BTG team warned exchanges about the attack, the exchange
Bittrex asked BTG team to pay for their loss. BTG refused to pay
and was delisted from Bittrex later in September 2018.
64

===== PAGE 67 =====

Coin
Date Succeeded? Loss in USD After the Attack
MonaCoin
(MONA)
Ma
y 13, 2018 -
May 15, 2018
Yes $90,000 Many exchanges halted deposits of Monacoin after the news of at-
tack. The Monacoin developer advised exchanges to increase con-
ﬁrmations to 100. Some news report stated that the attacker had
been attempting to exploit a weakness in the Monacoin’s diﬃculty
adjustment mechanism for six months prior to this attack being de-
tected.
Verge
(XVG)
Apr 4, 2018 Yes $15,000 The problem was temporarily ﬁxed with an emergency commit
posted by the lead Verge developer, because the attackers used a
weakness in the Verge code to falsify time stamps on blocks. Critics
said that the vulnerability remains unﬁxed after the blockchain was
hard-forked. The Verge team tried to downplay the severity of the
attack on social medias.
Elec-
troneum
(ETN)
Apr 1, 2018 Yes Unknown It was ﬁrst noticed because a massive amount of empty blocks were
constantly mined on the currency’s blockchain. Some ETN commu-
nity members suspected that the attacker was Bitmain, who seemed
to have large proportion of network hashrate at that time. This at-
tack aﬀected the Electroneum for a while, but Electroneum eventu-
ally moved on.
65

===== PAGE 68 =====

Coin
Date Succeeded? Loss in USD After the Attack
Krypton
(KR)
Aug
26, 2016 Yes $3,000 The attackers demanded a ransom, which Krypton declined to pay.
Krypton tried to turn to the PoS consensus mechanism to prevent
future attacks, but the project was terminated a few months later.
Terracoin
(TRC)
Jul 24, 2013 Yes Unknown Terracoin’s price collapsed. The exchange Bter annouced that the
attacker withdrew about 50 BTC value before the account was dis-
abled.
Feathercoin
(FTC)
Jun 8, 2013 -
Jun 10, 2013
Yes $1,400 Feathercoin later adopted an Advanced Checkpointing (ACP) fea-
ture to protect against 51% attacks. The checkpoint master node is
deployed and maintained by the lead FTC developer.
Coiledcoin
(CLC)
Jan 6, 2012 Yes Unknown The 51% attack killed CoiledCoin for non-ﬁnancial reasons. Some
community members accused Luke-Jr, a Bitcoin Core developer and
the founder of Eligis mining pool, of using the pool resources to at-
tack Coiledcoin. Luke-Jr denied it. But he stated that CoiledCoin
was a scam that would discredit and harm Bitcoin’s reputation.
66