

===== PAGE 1 =====

Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 347–369
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Financial Economics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec
Bitcoin’s limited adoption problem
Franz J. Hinzen a , Kose John a , Fahad Saleh b , ∗
a New York University Stern School of Business, 44 West 4th Street, New York, NY 10012, USA
b Wake Forest University, 1834 Wake Forest Rd, Winston-Salem, NC 27109, USA
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 16 December 2021
Revised 26 January 2022
Accepted 26 January 2022
JEL classiﬁcation:
E42
G00
G29
Keywords:
Bitcoin
Limited adoption
Consensus
Network delay
Blockchain
Fintech
a b s t r a c t
We demonstrate theoretically that Bitcoin’s limited adoption arises as an equilibrium out-
come rather than as a short-lived property. Our results are driven by negative network
effects which arise due to Bitcoin’s need for consensus and the existence of network de-
lay. As the Bitcoin network expands, network delay grows thereby prolonging the time
needed for generating consensus. In turn, transaction settlement becomes prolonged, and
users abandon the system, yielding limited adoption. Increasing transaction rates fails to
solve this problem because increasing transaction rates increases fork probabilities which
prolongs the consensus process and generates limited adoption.
©2 0 2 2 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Bitcoin was proposed by Nakamoto (2008) with the
goal of becoming a widely adopted decentralized payment
system. To date, however, Bitcoin remains sparsely adopted
as a payment system. Accordingly, a natural question be-
comes whether Bitcoin’s economic design is compatible
with its goal. This paper answers that question by demon-
strating that Bitcoin’s design makes limited adoption an
equilibrium outcome.
Our results arise because we uncover the existence
of negative network effects within Bitcoin’s design. These
negative network effects distinguish Bitcoin from tradi-
tional centralized payment systems and serve as the driv-
ing force for its limited adoption. To understand how nega-
tive network effects arise, we emphasize that a blockchain
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: fhinzen@stern.nyu.edu (F.J. Hinzen),
kjohn@stern.nyu.edu (K. John), salehf@wfu.edu (F. Saleh).
constitutes a unique electronic ledger that is stored among
a potentially large network of agents commonly referred
to as miners . Bitcoin’s design implies that miners are likely
to possess inconsistent ledgers at certain times, but such
inconsistencies must be reconciled for Bitcoin to be viable
because a transaction is deemed settled only if all miners
agree on it being on the ledger. Our analysis uncovers that
achieving agreement among miners, commonly referred to
as consensus , becomes more diﬃcult as the mining net-
work size increases which, in turn, contributes to negative
network effects.
The economics literature has thus far overlooked the
negative network effects from Bitcoin. That oversight arises
because theoretical analyses of Bitcoin typically neglect to
model network delay which refers to the time required to
communicate information across the mining network. A
novel feature of our analysis is that we incorporate net-
work delay which, together with the need for consen-
sus, generates negative network effects. To understand this
point, we highlight that miners cannot agree on any par-
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2022.01.003
0304-405X/© 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

===== PAGE 2 =====

F.J. Hinzen, K. John and F. Saleh Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 347–369
ticular information unless they are all aware of that infor-
mation. Network delay is relevant because it corresponds
to the time required for new information to become com-
mon information across the network. As we discuss in
Section 2.3 , network delay imposes limits upon the abil-
ity to generate consensus expeditiously even when miners
attempt to coordinate. Our analysis highlights that these
limits contribute to prohibitive delays for Bitcoin users and
consequently induce limited adoption.
We model Bitcoin as a queuing system in which miners
service a set of users. Each user has a unit transaction de-
mand and derives utility from her transaction being settled
on the blockchain. Users have a heterogeneous disutility
for waiting. Each user may pay a transaction fee to reduce
her expected wait time, but each user also incurs disutility
in proportion to the fee paid. Therefore, each user selects
a fee level in equilibrium to optimally balance her dislike
for waiting with that of paying a fee. If her optimal utility
from using Bitcoin falls below a reservation level then she
chooses to abandon Bitcoin, and we classify this choice as
non-adoption. The reservation level reﬂects the existence
of an outside option so that not adopting Bitcoin implies
transacting via a traditional alternative payment system.
Our ﬁrst main result, Proposition 2 , highlights that Bit-
coin cannot maintain a non-negligible adoption rate when
transaction demand becomes large. We deem this inabil-
ity to maintain a non-negligible adoption rate for large
transaction demands as limited adoption , which aligns our
meaning of limited adoption with common usage. To un-
derstand how our meaning of limited adoption aligns with
common usage, we offer a simple fact: Bitcoin is used by
more people than certain developed economy ﬁat curren-
cies, but Bitcoin’s adoption rate among all people is triv-
ial whereas those developed economy ﬁat currencies pos-
sess a near-universal adoption rate within their respective
countries. To give a concrete example, New Zealand has ap-
proximately 5 million people within its borders whereas
over 30 million people use Bitcoin. Nonetheless, the New
Zealand Dollar (NZD) is not considered sparsely adopted,
and Bitcoin is not considered widely adopted as a payment
system. The referenced framing arises because the adop-
tion rate of NZD in New Zealand is approximately 100%
whereas the adoption rate of Bitcoin almost anywhere in
the world is less than 1%. Thus, we focus on the adoption
rate rather than the raw number of users. Moreover, we
examine the adoption rate as transaction demand becomes
large because we seek to understand how widely adopted
Bitcoin could become if it were to compete directly with
traditional payment systems which experience large trans-
action demands.
We relate the aforementioned result to three features
of Bitcoin: the need for consensus among miners, free en-
try with respect to the mining network, and a supply con-
straint on the transaction rate. As discussed, the need for
consensus arises because the blockchain is a unique ledger,
and disagreement implies that miners possess different
ledgers. Free entry is directly imposed within Bitcoin by
the fact that serving as a miner requires no special per-
mission, implying that mining is feasible but not necessar-
ily incentive-compatible for all agents. As previously noted,
users may pay fees to reduce wait times, and those fees
are paid to miners. Potential miners trade off the beneﬁts
from earning those fees against the costs of participating
in the mining process. Accordingly, our analysis imposes a
free-entry condition by determining the set of active min-
ers as those for whom mining is economically proﬁtable.
The supply constraint on the transaction rate refers to an
observed fact of Bitcoin. More precisely, the Bitcoin ledger
updates approximately every 10 min and that rate of up-
dating corresponds to a supply constraint on the transac-
tion rate.
Proposition 2 arises from a straight-forward economic
analysis. The supply constraint on Bitcoin’s transaction rate
implies that prices rather than quantities primarily re-
spond to an increase in transaction demand. Thus, height-
ened transaction demand endogenously generates an in-
crease in fees (i.e., the price for expedited service). The
fee increase, in turn, augments expected revenues from
serving as a miner. The mining network’s free entry con-
dition then implies that additional miners enter the net-
work. The resulting network expansion exacerbates net-
work delay which, due to the need for consensus, pro-
longs expected user wait times. The prolonged user wait
times then drive users away from Bitcoin towards the tra-
ditional alternative so that a shrinking fraction of users ac-
tually adopt Bitcoin. Accordingly, Proposition 2 establishes
that Bitcoin cannot maintain a non-negligible adoption rate
when facing heightened demand - we term this problem
the limited adoption problem .
A natural response to the described limited adoption
problem might be to propose that Bitcoin adopt a ﬂexi-
ble transaction rate that expands in the presence of height-
ened demand. While such a proposal may succeed in a tra-
ditional setting, we ﬁnd that it fails in the case of Bitcoin
due to Bitcoin’s decentralized economic design, which re-
quires consensus and makes network delay an important
constraint. We formalize that point via our second main
result, Proposition 3 .
To convey the intuition from Proposition 3 , we offer an
example of how an expansion of processing rates solves
limited adoption in a traditional setting and contrast that
with Bitcoin’s context. For the example of a traditional set-
ting, we consider a grocery store. Just as Bitcoin might
face a heightened demand for transactions, the grocery
store might face a heightened demand for check out by
customers. Nonetheless, the grocery store’s heightened de-
mand need not lead to prohibitive wait times and cus-
tomers abandoning the store (akin to limited adoption) be-
cause the grocery store could counter the heightened de-
mand by increasing the number of check-out counters (i.e.,
increasing the processing rate). The increased processing
rate would then reduce wait times, thereby solving the
problem. In contrast, the analogous action of increasing
Bitcoin’s transaction rate fails to solve the limited adoption
problem for Bitcoin. This failure arises precisely because of
the need for consensus and the relevance of network delay.
Importantly, within a grocery store, the cashiers need not
jointly agree upon one sequence of customers (i.e., they
do not need to attain consensus); rather, the cashiers con-
duct parallel processing without any need to communi-
cate thereby rendering communication time (akin to net-
work delay) irrelevant. If the cashiers were required to
348

===== PAGE 3 =====

F.J. Hinzen, K. John and F. Saleh Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 347–369
communicate with each other and converge upon a sin-
gle sequence of customers processed across all cashiers
(akin to consensus), then increasing the number of cashiers
would not solve the problem because that increase would
exacerbate communication diﬃculties. Those communica-
tion diﬃculties would then generate delays, leading to pro-
longed customer wait times. Similarly, within Bitcoin, in-
creasing the transaction rate increases the time needed to
achieve consensus which then generates prohibitive user
wait times and thus results in limited adoption.
We distinguish between the Bitcoin payment system
and its native asset, bitcoin, with our focus being on the
former. Importantly, our results do not preclude the suc-
cess of bitcoin as an asset. Rather, we demonstrate that
such success is unlikely to be driven by adoption of the un-
derlying payment system so that bitcoin should be viewed
as something other than as a medium of exchange. Recent
work supports this view, demonstrating that transactional
beneﬁts can explain only a trivial fraction of bitcoin price
movements (see Biais et al., 2020 ).
Our results apply to Bitcoin and similar blockchains
but do not apply to blockchains in general. In particu-
lar, as we discuss in Section 5 , there are a variety of
blockchain proposals that potentially overcome limited
adoption although those proposals remain understudied
among economists. Some particularly compelling proposals
include Bitcoin NG, modern Proof-of-Stake protocols and
permissioned blockchains.
Our paper relates to a large literature that stud-
ies the economics of Bitcoin. John et al. (2022) pro-
vide a survey of that literature. Moreover, some
notable works within that literature include
Yermack (2015) , Biais et al. (2019) , Easley et al. (2019) ,
Foley et al. (2019) , Raskin et al. (2019) , Biais et al. (2020) ,
Chiu and Koeppl (2020) , Griﬃn and Shams (2020) ,
Makarov and Schoar (2020) , Alsabah and Capponi (2021) ,
Cong et al. (2021a) , Huberman et al. (2021) and
Pagnotta (2022) . Papers closely related to our work include
Cong et al. (2021b) and Iyengar et al. (2022) . In particular,
both Cong et al. (2021b) and Iyengar et al. (2022) also
study blockchain adoption, but neither examine the
speciﬁc context of Bitcoin. Iyengar et al. (2022) study
blockchain adoption in a business context, whereas
Cong et al. (2021b) abstract from network delay, which is
a key friction for Bitcoin as our results establish.
Our work also relates to a part of the computer sci-
ence literature that offers solutions for scaling blockchains.
That literature provides technical speciﬁcations but not
economic analyses. More concretely, the referenced liter-
ature does not model user preferences nor endogenous
adoption decisions so that our work serves as an economic
complement to it. For a survey of prominent ideas from
the referenced literature, the interested reader may consult
Zhou et al. (2020) .
2. Model
We model an inﬁnite horizon setting with two types
of agents, users and miners. Our setting also involves two
types of payment systems, Bitcoin and a traditional alter-
native. We assume that each user possesses unit transac-
tion demand and conducts that transaction via either Bit-
coin or the traditional alternative. Transactions are added
to the Bitcoin blockchain by miners who receive fees, en-
dogenously selected by users, for processing those transac-
tions. The remainder of this section presents our model in
detail.
2.1. Users
At t = 0 , N ≥ 2 users arrive simultaneously. Each user
possesses unit transaction demand and satisﬁes that de-
mand using either Bitcoin or a traditional alternative.
User i ∈ { 1 , . . . , N} possesses type c i ∼U[ c , c ] which cor-
responds to her disutility towards waiting for her transac-
tion to be processed. We assume that c > c so that there
exists heterogeneity among users (i.e., P (c i = c j ) = 0 for i ̸ =
j). We also assume that c > 0 so that all users are impa-
tient (i.e., c i > 0 for all i ). We let W (f, f −i ) denote User i ’s
wait time when she pays fee f ≥ 0 with f −i denoting the
equilibrium fees paid by other users. In turn, User i ’s to-
tal expected disutility from waiting equals c i · E [ W (f, f −i )]
when she pays fee f. We further assume that User i
earns endogenous utility R 1 · (π∗N) α + R 0 from transact-
ing via Bitcoin where R 0 , R 1 ∈ R + and α ∈ (0 , 1) are exoge-
nous parameters, whereas π∗ ∈ [0 , 1] denotes the endoge-
nous adoption rate of Bitcoin. 1 In turn, π∗N represents the
endogenous adoption level of Bitcoin. User i ’s total utility
from transacting via Bitcoin equals R 1 · (π∗N) α + R 0 −c i ·
E [ W (f, f −i )] − f when she pays fee f. We model the tra-
ditional alternative as an outside option with utility from
using it normalized to 0. Therefore, User i solves:
max { max
f≥0
R 1 · (π∗N) α + R 0 −c i · E [ W (f, f −i )] − f, 0 }
(1)
We assume that user types are private information but
the distribution from which types are drawn is common
knowledge (i.e., User i does not know c j for j ̸ = i but
knows c j ∼U[ c , c ] ). Accordingly, the expectation over wait
times is taken over the equilibrium fees of other users,
each of which will depend upon the type of the respective
user. Miners optimally process transactions in descending
fee order so that a higher fee improves the probability
that a user receives service sooner. Each user trades off
the disutility from paying a higher fee with the utility gain
from a reduction in her expected wait time and thereby
selects an optimal fee in equilibrium. If R 1 · (π∗N) α + R 0 −
c i · E [ W (f i , f −i )] − f i ≥ 0 , with f i ≥ 0 denoting User i ’s op-
timal fee, then User i transacts via Bitcoin. Otherwise, User
i employs the traditional alternative. This adoption choice
follows from the user’s access to a traditional alternative
that confers her a utility of 0.
Akin to Huberman et al. (2021) , we examine cut-off
equilibria with the cut-off denoted by c ∗ ∈ [ c , c ] . More pre-
cisely, we solve for equilibria such that the set of users that
adopt is given by { i : c i ≤ c ∗} with User c ∗ being referred
1 We impose R 0 > R to rule out a trivial equilibrium in which no user
adopts Bitcoin, which we deﬁne formally later in this section. Explicitly,
R = c · ( 1
/Lambda1+ τ(/Lambda1, /Delta1( B
β )) where B , β, /Lambda1, /Delta1(·) and τ(·, ·) are introduced
later in this section.
349

===== PAGE 4 =====

F.J. Hinzen, K. John and F. Saleh Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 347–369
to as the marginal user hereafter. We deﬁne the adoption
rate, π∗, as the expected proportion of users that adopt
Bitcoin (i.e., π∗ ≡ P (c i ≤ c ∗) ). Consequently, the cut-off, c ∗,
possesses a bijective relationship with the adoption rate,
π∗, as follows:
π∗ =
c ∗ −c
c −c
, c ∗ = ( c −c ) · π∗ + c (2)
2.2. Miners
A miner refers to a member of the Bitcoin network that
stores a copy of the Bitcoin ledger and “mines” to update
the ledger. As a convention, we use “miner” to refer to
a single computer processor that participates in the Bit-
coin network. This convention does not preclude that mul-
tiple processors might be controlled by the same agent.
In fact, we discuss the implications of such centralization
in Section 5.1 although our main results hold for arbitrary
mining market structures.
Each miner must pay some cost β > 0 to acquire min-
ing technology. We assume that each processor possesses
identical hashing power so that each miner expects to earn
an equal share of fees among all miners. 2 Our analysis fo-
cuses on transaction fees, but we allow that there exists a
block reward, B , paid to miners. 3 Then, assuming risk neu-
tral preferences, each miner solves:
max {
1
M
(
B + E [
∑
i
f i ]
)
− β, 0 } (3)
M denotes the equilibrium number of miners so that
the pay-off from mining equals 1
M
(
B + E [
∑
i
f i ]
)
whereas
the pay-off from not mining equals 0. Bitcoin’s design al-
lows for free entry among miners, so miners must be in-
different between mining and not mining. Accordingly, we
impose the following free entry condition in equilibrium:
M =
B + E [
∑
i
f i ]
β (4)
As an aside, our model assumes that miners are patient.
Accordingly, miners do not discount their fee revenues and
the total expected present value of mining revenues equals
B + E [
∑
i
f i ] directly. 4 Our assumption regarding miners be-
ing perfectly patient is a simpliﬁcation to reﬂect that min-
ers are signiﬁcantly more patient than users seeking casual
transactions. More precisely, an hour long wait for a casual
transaction would likely dissuade a user from using Bitcoin
2 This assumption is appropriate since most miners use the same type
of specialized computing hardware (see Alsabah and Capponi, 2021 and
Ferreira et al., 2020 ).
3 We assume that B > β which ensures that it is incentive compatible
for at least one processor to participate in mining.
4 It is important to recognize that while our model considers consensus
delays, our model never generates perpetual disagreement. Rather, within
our model, consensus always obtains eventually with probability one. As
a consequence, miners being patient implies that the expected present
value of mining revenues equals the expected sum of block rewards and
fees: B + E [ ∑
i
f i ] .
for a purchase. In contrast, mining is a business and earn-
ing revenues an hour (or even days) later would be practi-
cally immaterial.
2.3. Blockchain
A blockchain constitutes an electronic ledger. Users sub-
mit transactions which are accumulated by miners in dis-
crete chunks called blocks . In turn, the blocks are placed in
a chain with a speciﬁc order, hence the term blockchain.
Blocks have a ﬁxed maximal size, and a block can be
added to the existing chain of blocks only if the block is
valid . Within the setting of Bitcoin, a block is valid if it
solves a trivial but computationally intensive puzzle. 5 The
block generation process is of economic importance be-
cause it regulates the rate at which transactions enter the
blockchain which, in turn, affects user utility through user
wait times.
The process by which a single miner produces a valid
block is well-known to be approximated by a Poisson pro-
cess so that prior literature generally assumes that each
miner generates valid blocks exactly according to a Pois-
son process. 6 We also adopt that assumption, but we de-
part from prior literature with regard to our modeling of
blocks that ultimately enter the blockchain. In particular,
our analysis incorporates the fact that all valid blocks do
not necessarily enter the blockchain. This fact holds true
because valid blocks might not be consistent with each
other and thus some valid blocks might have to be dis-
carded. The possibility for valid blocks to be inconsistent
with each other is well known and is referred to as a fork . 7
We ﬁrst qualitatively explain the source of forks within
our analysis and then state our formal model of the
blockchain. Our analysis assumes that miners attempt to
co-ordinate. More precisely, each Miner j ̸ = i accepts a
valid block sent by Miner i if Miner i ’s block is consis-
tent with the blockchain already stored by Miner j when
5 See de Vries (2018) , Chiu and Koeppl (2020) and Saleh (2019) for de-
tails regarding the magnitude of energy expenditure and associated wel-
fare implications.
6 Formally, the number of valid blocks produced by a miner in any in-
terval of T time units is given exactly by #(T ) :=
N B ·T ∑
n =1
X n where N B denotes
the number of attempts per unit time and X n denotes an indicator equal-
ing one if and only if the n th attempt was successful. The Bitcoin com-
putational puzzle is speciﬁed such that { X n } ∞
n =1 is an independent and
identically distributed sequence. Then, letting ρ := P (X n = 1) denote the
probability that an individual attempt succeeds, the Poisson Limit The-
orem (PLT) implies that #(T )
d → Poisson (λ ·T ) as N B → ∞ when ρ → 0 +
with λ:= lim
N B →∞ ρ ·N B . Thus, if the number of attempts per unit time is
large (i.e., N B is large) and the likelihood that each attempt succeeds is
small (i.e, ρ is near zero), then PLT establishes that the number of blocks
produced by a given miner, #(T ) , is approximated by a Poisson process.
In practice, both aforementioned hypotheses are met because attempts
are conducted by specialized computing units so that N B is large, and the
computational puzzle is diﬃcult so that ρ is close to zero.
7 A fork may arise due to network delay or due to misaligned miner
incentives. Biais et al. (2019) study forks which arise due to misaligned
miner incentives whereas we focus upon forks that arise due to network
delay. Decker and Wattenhofer (2013) indicate that Bitcoin forks arise
largely due to network delay, and our analysis (see Proposition 3 ) indi-
cates that such forks become especially problematic when the transaction
rate of the blockchain is increased.
350

===== PAGE 5 =====

F.J. Hinzen, K. John and F. Saleh Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 347–369
Miner j ﬁrst receives news of Miner i ’s block. If any Miner
j ̸ = i ﬁnds that Miner i ’s block is not consistent with her
blockchain when she ﬁrst receives news of Miner i ’s block
then she rejects the block and a fork arises due to a dis-
agreement between Miners i and j. Under such an as-
sumption, if all miners initially store the same blockchain
(i.e., the blockchain is in a state of consensus) then Miner
i ’s block will not correspond to a fork if no Miner j ̸ = i
produces a valid block before receiving news of Miner i ’s
block. This fact holds because two blocks are necessarily
inconsistent with each other if they are produced with-
out knowledge of each other. 8 Intuitively, if Miner j ̸ = i
produces a valid block after Miner i but before receiv-
ing news of Miner i ’s block then Miner i and j disagree
on the temporal order of their two blocks because each
miner believes that her block was produced ﬁrst. As the
two blocks are inconsistent with each other, each miner
must select only one of the two blocks. Since either a time-
ordering rule or even personal self-interest would lead to
each miner selecting her own block, a fork results (i.e., lack
of consensus obtains).
To incorporate forks into our model, we proceed by de-
termining the probability that a given valid block corre-
sponds to a fork:
P (F ork ) = 1 −e −/Lambda1/Delta1(M) (5)
/Lambda1denotes the transaction rate, and /Delta1(M) denotes the
network delay for a normalized single-transaction block
averaged over all pairs of the M miners in the net-
work. Equation (5) highlights that the fork probability in-
creases in both the transaction rate and the network de-
lay for normalized block; we establish that relationship in
Appendix A and defer associated technical details to that
section. Among other results, Appendix A demonstrates an
equivalence between modifying block sizes and modifying
block rates so that changes in the transaction rate, /Lambda1, may
be analyzed without speciﬁc attention to whether such
changes are implemented by modifying the block size or
the block rate. Accordingly, we normalize the block size to
a single transaction hereafter.
We assume that miners must agree on b ∈ N + con-
secutive blocks to regain consensus regarding the entire
blockchain’s contents when the blockchain is not already
in a state of consensus. All our results hold even for b = 1
which corresponds to assuming that consensus on the en-
tire blockchain’s content requires only agreement on the
most recent block. In general, agreement on a single block
need not imply consensus on the full chain. Thus, our ﬁnd-
ings highlight that limited adoption arises for Bitcoin even
with generous assumptions regarding generating consen-
sus.
To complete our model speciﬁcation, we now clarify
our assumptions regarding /Delta1(M) , the network delay. We
model /Delta1(M) in general terms as any function that satisﬁes
the following two conditions: /Delta1(1) = 0 , and /Delta1′ (M) > 0 for
M > 1 . The ﬁrst condition, /Delta1(1) = 0 , asserts only that a
8 Knowledge of each other is necessary because the puzzle being solved
depends upon the entire chain of blocks to which the new block is
being appended. For further details, the interested reader may consult
John et al. (2022) .
network with one miner (i.e., a centralized network) pos-
sesses no network delay. The second condition states that
network delay increases as the network size increases be-
yond a single miner. The ﬁrst condition is self-evident (i.e.,
communication with oneself requires no time) whereas
the second assumption is consistent with the random net-
work topology of Bitcoin (see Chung and Lu, 2002 and
Riordan and Wormald, 2010 ).
2.4. Equilibrium
We formally deﬁne an equilibrium as follows:
Deﬁnition 1 . Bitcoin Equilibrium
Our Bitcoin model is parameterized by the number of
users, N, three parameters relating to the blockchain utility
for each user, R 0 , R 1 and α, and the blockchain transaction
rate, /Lambda1. The N users possess types, { c i } N
i =1 , with c i ∼U[ c , c ] .
A Bitcoin Equilibrium is (1) an adoption cut-off, c ∗, (2) a
function, φ(c) , that maps user types to their fees, (3) a set
of fee realizations for the N users, { f i } N
i =1 , and (4) a min-
ing network size, M. The equilibrium satisﬁes the following
conditions:
(i) A User Adopts Bitcoin Iff Doing So Is Optimal A user
adopts Bitcoin (i.e., c i ≤ c ∗) if and only if doing so is
optimal.
(i.e., for all c ≤ c ∗ ⇔ max
f≥0
R 1 · (π∗N) α + R 0 −c ·
E [ W (f, f −i )] − f ≥ 0 where π∗ = c ∗−c
c −c )
(ii) Equilibrium User Fees Depend Upon User Types
User i pays a fee, f i , which depends on her type, c i .
(i.e., for all i : f i = φ(c i ) )
(iii) Equilibrium Fee Function Provides Optimal Bitcoin
Fees
The fee function, φ(c i ) , provides optimal Bitcoin
fees. In particular, the user maximizes her utility
from using Bitcoin if she adopts Bitcoin (i.e., φ(c)
solves max
f≥0
R 1 · (π∗N) α + R 0 −c · E [ W (f, f −i )] − f if
c ≤ c ∗) but pays zero fees to Bitcoin otherwise (i.e.,
φ(c) = 0 if c > c ∗) because, per Condition i, using
Bitcoin is not optimal in that case (i.e., max
f≥0
R 1 ·
(π∗N) α + R 0 −c · E [ W (f, f −i )] − f < 0 if c > c ∗).
(iv) A User Receives Settlement After Higher Priority
Users And When Consensus Next Obtains
User i ’s wait time, W (f, f −i ) , if she pays fee f de-
pends not only on f but also on other user fees,
f −i . More precisely, transactions are processed in
descending fee order so that User i must wait ∑
j: f≤f j H j with H j denoting the service time for
User j and { j : f ≤ f j } denoting the set of users
paying higher fees. 9 Further, User i ’s transaction is
not settled even after her transaction enters the
blockchain unless the blockchain is at consensus. We
denote the (random and possibly zero) time until
consensus next obtains by Z i . 10 Thus, our user wait
function becomes:
W (f, f −i ) =
∑
j: f≤f j
H j + Z i
9 Recall that we normalize the block size to one transaction per block.
10 We detail the properties of Z i in Appendix B .
351

===== PAGE 6 =====

F.J. Hinzen, K. John and F. Saleh Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 347–369
(v) The Mining Market Is Characterized By Free Entry
The total expected cost of mining, β, equals the to-
tal expected proﬁt from mining, 1
M
(
B + E [
∑
i
f i ]
)
, for
each miner. (i.e, β = 1
M
(
B + E [
∑
i
f i ]
)
)
Deﬁnition 1 simply summarizes the discussion from
Sections 2.1 –2.3 , condensing it into an equilibrium deﬁni-
tion. Therefore, we do not elaborate further on our equi-
librium deﬁnition except that we note now that we as-
sume the blockchain’s stationary distribution characterizes
its initial state. 11 The subsequent result establishes equilib-
rium existence:
Proposition 1 . Bitcoin Equilibrium
There exists a Bitcoin Equilibrium. The following con-
ditions characterize that equilibrium with τ(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M)) ≡
E [ Z 1 ] , /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M)) ≡ 1
/Lambda1+ τ(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M)) and M(c) ≡ B
β +
N (N −1)
6 β/Lambda1
(c−c ) ·(c 2 + c·c −2 c 2 )
( c −c ) 2 :
(A) φ(c) = N−1
c −c × c 2 −c 2
2/Lambda1if c ≤ c ∗ and φ(c) = 0 otherwise.
(B) M = M(c ∗) .
(C) If R 1 ·N α +R 0 < c · /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M( c ))) + (N −1) × c + c
2/Lambda1,
then c ∗ ∈ ( c , c ) and c ∗ solves:
R 1 · ( c ∗−c
c −c ) α ·N α + R 0 = c ∗/Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M(c ∗))) + N−1
c −c ×
c 2 ∗ −c 2
2/Lambda1
(D) If R 1 ·N α +R 0 ≥ c · /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M( c ))) + (N −1) × c + c
2/Lambda1,
then a full adoption equilibrium arises:
c ∗ = c ⇐⇒ π∗ = 1
We follow prior literature and require that φ constitutes a
strictly increasing and twice differentiable function on the in-
terval ( c , c ∗) . In such a case, any equilibrium must satisfy the
above conditions, and we prove that at least one such equi-
librium exists for any set of parameters.
Proposition 1 (A) characterizes the equilibrium fee func-
tion. This fee function is such that each user’s opti-
mal fee equals the function evaluated at the user’s type
(i.e., f i = φ(c i ) ) when each user anticipates that all other
users select fees according to the same fee function (i.e.,
for all j ̸ = i : f j = φ(c j ) ). More formally, as required by
Deﬁnitions 1 (ii) and (iii), φ is a function that solves the
following problem:
φ(c i ) = arg max
f≥0
R 1 · (π∗N) α + R 0 −c i · E [ W (f, φ(c −i ))] −f
(6)
for all c i with φ(c −i ) ≡×
j : j ̸ = i
φ(c j ) so that φ(c −i ) corre-
sponds to the equilibrium fees of all users other than User
i .
Note that the equilibrium fee function implies that any
user who prefers to use the traditional alternative instead
of the blockchain pays no fees (i.e., φ(c i ) = 0 for all c i >
c ∗). That behavior is optimal because user utility decreases
in the level of the fee so that a zero fee is trivially optimal
11 The interested reader may consult Appendix B for the explicit station-
ary distribution and associated technical details.
when a user does not use Bitcoin. In contrast, users who
transact via the blockchain in equilibrium (i.e., any User i
such that c i ≤ c ∗) pay fees according to:
φ(c i ) =
N −1
c −c
× c 2
i −c 2
2/Lambda1 (7)
which highlights that a user’s equilibrium fee increases
in transaction demand and the user’s wait disutility
(i.e., φ(c i ) increases in N and c i ) but decreases in the
blockchain’s transaction rate (i.e., φ(c i ) decreases in /Lambda1).
Fees increasing in transaction demand and decreasing in
the blockchain’s transaction rate both reﬂect that fees in-
crease in congestion. Fees increasing in a user’s wait disu-
tility reﬂects that a high-wait-disutility user values a re-
duction in wait time more so than a low-wait-disutility
user, leading the former to pay a higher fee in equilibrium.
Proposition 1 (B) characterizes the equilibrium number
of miners, M(c ∗) , in an equilibrium where c ∗ denotes the
adoption cut-off. This condition arises directly from apply-
ing the equilibrium fee function to the free entry condition
of the mining market, given by Deﬁnition 1 v.
Proposition 1 (C) characterizes the adoption cut-off in
the case that there exists a user indifferent between us-
ing the blockchain and using the traditional alternative.
In such a case, the cut-off user (i.e., any User i such that
c i = c ∗) gains no utility from transacting via the blockchain
since, as discussed, we normalize the utility of the tradi-
tional alternative to zero. In turn, this implies that the util-
ity from transacting via the blockchain, R 1 · (π∗N) α + R 0 =
R 1 · ( c ∗−c
c −c ) α ·N α + R 0 , must equal the sum of the wait disu-
tility, c ∗/Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M(c ∗))) , and the fees paid, φ(c ∗) = N−1
c −c ×
c 2 ∗ −c 2
2/Lambda1.
Proposition 1 (D) characterizes the adoption cut-off
in the case that all users weakly prefer transacting via
the blockchain. In this case, c ∗ = c ⇔ π∗ = 1 because then
any User c i is below the adoption cut-off (i.e., c i ≤ c ∗ = c
for all i ). Note that this case arises only when the ex-
ogenous utility from transacting via the blockchain with
full adoption, R 1 · (π∗N) α +R 0 = R 1 ·N α +R 0 , is suﬃciently
high such that even the highest-wait-disutility user (i.e.,
any User c i such that c i = c ) weakly prefers to use the
blockchain instead of the traditional alternative (i.e., R 1 ·
N α + R 0 ≥ c · /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M( c ))) + (N −1) × c + c
2/Lambda1).
3. Main results
We begin by considering Bitcoin with a ﬁxed transac-
tion rate (i.e., ﬁxed /Lambda1), which is consistent with Bitcoin’s
existing design. In that context, we demonstrate that Bit-
coin faces limited adoption ( Proposition 2 ). We then allow
for a variable transaction rate within Bitcoin (i.e., we let
/Lambda1vary), and we demonstrate that our conclusion regard-
ing Bitcoin facing limited adoption holds in that case also
( Proposition 3 ).
Proposition 2 . Limited Adoption I
Bitcoin faces limited adoption (i.e., lim
N→∞
π∗ = 0) .
Proposition 2 provides our ﬁrst main result. This re-
sult establishes that Bitcoin’s adoption rate tends to zero
(i.e., π∗ → 0 ) as transaction demand diverges (i.e., N →
352

===== PAGE 7 =====

F.J. Hinzen, K. John and F. Saleh Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 347–369
∞ ). Note that this result implies that Bitcoin’s adop-
tion rate is arbitrarily small for suﬃciently large trans-
action demand. As such, Proposition 2 thus highlights
that Bitcoin cannot maintain a non-trivial adoption rate
if a large number of users consider Bitcoin as a feasible
option.
We note that our formal characterization of limited
adoption is lim
N→∞
π∗ = 0 . Our characterization examines
N → ∞ because our analysis aims to consider the Bitcoin
adoption rate across the globe, and, for tractability reasons,
it is easier to analyze N → ∞ rather than N being some
particular large number such as global transaction demand.
We emphasize that lim
N→∞
π∗ = 0 implies that for large N,
the Bitcoin adoption rate, π∗, is close to zero hence our us-
age of lim
N→∞
π∗ = 0 as the formal characterization of limited
adoption. As a practical matter, our ﬁndings establish that
Bitcoin is unlikely to become widely adopted as a payment
system across the world, as initially hoped.
To provide further context, we explain the channel for
Proposition 2 based on our equilibrium solutions given
by Proposition 1 . Per Proposition 1 (A), an increase in
transaction demand exacerbates congestion, thereby rais-
ing equilibrium fees (i.e., φ(c) increases in N). Then, per
Proposition 1 (B), that increase in fees generates an in-
crease in the number of miners (i.e., M increases in N).
The relationship between fees and the number of min-
ers arises because fees correspond to revenue for min-
ers, and the mining network is characterized by free entry
so that increased fees induce entry of miners. Finally, per
Proposition 1 (C), Bitcoin’s adoption rate declines as the
equilibrium number of miners increases (i.e., π∗ decreases
in M). This decrease in the adoption rate arises because
the increase in the mining network size implies a com-
mensurate increase in network delay which, in turn, pro-
longs user wait times (i.e., /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M )) increases in M per
Lemma 10 ). Those increased wait times then reduce the
adoption rate. Proposition 2 establishes that the adoption
rate becomes arbitrarily small (i.e., π∗ → 0 ) as transaction
demand becomes arbitrarily large (i.e., N → ∞ ), thereby
establishing limited adoption.
A natural response to the limited adoption thus far de-
scribed might be to suggest Bitcoin adopt a ﬂexible trans-
action rate that increases with transaction demand (i.e.,
Bitcoin should vary /Lambda1with N). In fact, that proposed solu-
tion is employed in traditional settings to resolve a similar
problem. For instance, in the introduction, we discuss the
example of a grocery store that could experience height-
ened demand but overcomes the problem by increasing
its processing rate. In particular, when there exists an in-
crease in customers checking out of the grocery store (i.e.,
heightened demand), the store responds by increasing the
number of cashiers (i.e., increasing the processing rate).
In the grocery store setting, the described response keeps
wait times low and thereby avoids customers abandon-
ing the store. With that example as motivation, we sub-
sequently explore the implications of Bitcoin allowing in-
creased transaction rates. In contrast to the grocery store
setting, we ﬁnd that this policy fails to resolve the prob-
lem within the Bitcoin setting. Proposition 3 formalizes
this point:
Proposition 3 . Limited Adoption II
Suppose that Bitcoin’s transaction rate, /Lambda1N , varies with
transaction demand, N. Then, even in such a case, Bitcoin
faces limited adoption (i.e., lim
N→∞
π∗ = 0) .
Proposition 3 allows that Bitcoin’s transaction rate,
/Lambda1, depends upon transaction demand, N, and we here-
after acknowledge that dependence by denoting the trans-
action rate as /Lambda1N . Even allowing for such dependence,
Proposition 3 establishes that Bitcoin faces limited adop-
tion.
To understand Proposition 3 , we highlight that our
model implies the following decomposition for User i ’s ex-
pected equilibrium wait time, E i [ W (f i , f −i )] , with E i [ ·] de-
noting an expectation with respect to User i ’s information
set:
E i [ W (f i , f −i )] =
(N −1)(c ∗ −c i ) + 1
/Lambda1N   
T raditional Wait T ime
+ τ(/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M))
  
Consensus Wait T ime
(8)
Equation (8) states that the expected wait time of each
user decomposes into two terms: the traditional wait time
and the consensus wait time. We refer to the ﬁrst term
as the traditional wait time because this component would
appear even for a traditional centralized payment system.
In contrast, the second term, which we refer to as consen-
sus wait time, would not appear for a centralized payment
system and therefore distinguishes Bitcoin from a central-
ized payment system.
The traditional wait time refers to the sum of the ex-
pected wait time for all users served before User i and
the expected service time for User i . Importantly, the tradi-
tional wait time decreases in the transaction rate and van-
ishes as the transaction rate diverges so that it can be kept
arbitrarily small by adjusting the transaction rate. To in-
tuit this point, we note that the maximal traditional wait
equals N
/Lambda1N because even the adopting user who pays the
lowest fee waits for no more than N −1 other users. As an
example, if N = 10 and /Lambda1N = 10 transactions per second,
then all users complete their traditional wait time within
1 s. If there is an increase in transaction demand with the
number of potential users becoming 10 0 0 (i.e., N = 10 0 0 )
then increasing the transaction rate to 10 0 0 transactions
per second (i.e., /Lambda110 0 0 = 10 0 0 ) maintains the 1 s upper
bound for the traditional wait time. More generally, the
traditional wait time is bounded above by ε > 0 if /Lambda1N =
N
ε . Thus, as users for a centralized payment system face
only this traditional wait time, a centralized payment sys-
tem may avoid limited adoption simply by increasing its
transaction rate to meet demand (i.e., increasing /Lambda1N as N
grows).
However, unlike a centralized payment system, Bit-
coin cannot overcome limited adoption by increasing its
transaction rate as shown by Proposition 3 . That result
arises because Bitcoin requires consensus among miners
which, in turn, introduces an additional component to wait
time that we refer to as the consensus wait time (i.e.,
τ(/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M)) appears in Eq. (8) ). In fact, as we show
353

===== PAGE 8 =====

F.J. Hinzen, K. John and F. Saleh Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 347–369
subsequently, the consensus wait time, τ(/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M)) , be-
comes prohibitive as the transaction rate increases:
Proposition 4 . Consensus Wait Time Diverges with Transac-
tion Demand
Suppose that Bitcoin adjusts its transaction rate to keep
pace with transaction demand (i.e., lim
N→∞
/Lambda1N = ∞ ) . Then, the
Consensus Wait Time, τ(/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M)) , diverges as demand di-
verges, (i.e., lim
N→∞
τ(/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M)) = ∞ ) .
To provide some intuition regarding Proposition 4 , we
return to Eq. (5) which establishes that the probability
a block corresponds to a fork equals 1 −e −/Lambda1/Delta1(M) . 12 Ac-
cordingly, a higher transaction rate, /Lambda1, implies a higher
fork probability and thus a lower probability of con-
sensus. In turn, a lower probability of consensus on a
given block implies a longer consensus wait time. In
fact, Proposition 4 highlights that arbitrarily large transac-
tion rates generate arbitrarily large consensus wait times.
Thus, expected wait times diverge as transaction rates be-
come arbitrarily large (i.e., lim
N→∞
E i [ W (f i , f −i )] = ∞ when
lim
N
/Lambda1N = ∞ as per Eq. (8) ) so that limited adoption arises
even when transaction rates keep pace with transaction
demand per Proposition 3 .
The implication of our results as a whole is that Bit-
coin faces a dilemma in the face of heightened transaction
demand. Either Bitcoin keeps transaction rates ﬁxed or it
varies transaction rates with transaction demand. If Bitcoin
keeps transaction rates ﬁxed (in line with Bitcoin’s cur-
rent design) then Bitcoin faces prohibitive traditional wait
times and, in turn, limited adoption per Proposition 2 . Al-
ternatively, if Bitcoin varies transaction rates with trans-
action demand then the consensus wait time becomes
prohibitive thereby also generating limited adoption per
Proposition 3 .
We have noted that a novelty of our analysis is in-
corporating network delay into an economic model of
blockchain. To emphasize the importance of incorpo-
rating this real-world feature that constitutes a prac-
tical constraint for Bitcoin, we provide the following
result:
Proposition 5 . No Adoption Problem Without Network Delay
Widespread adoption (i.e., lim
N→∞
π∗ > 0) can be obtained
within arbitrarily large networks (i.e., lim
N→∞
M = ∞ ) under the
counterfactual assumption of no network delay (i.e., /Delta1(M) =
0 for all M) .
Proposition 5 establishes that Bitcoin could overcome
limited adoption if it did not possess network delay. In-
tuitively, an absence of network delay implies that forks
would never arise (i.e., P (F ork ) = 0 in Eq. (5) if /Delta1(M) =
0 ). In such a case, Bitcoin would always be in a state
of consensus (i.e., τ(/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M)) = τ(/Lambda1N , 0) = 0 ) and thus
could overcome limited adoption in a manner similar
to a centralized payment system. Nonetheless, Bitcoin
possessing no network delay is counterfactual so that
12 Appendix A provides details regarding Eq. (5) .
Proposition 5 should be interpreted as a result that clar-
iﬁes economic limitations intrinsic to Bitcoin.
4. Finite N
Our main ﬁndings, Propositions 2 and 3 , provide limit-
ing results (i.e., N → ∞ ) to establish implications for adop-
tion when demand is large (i.e., large N). In this section, we
supplement those ﬁndings with results that hold for ﬁnite
N. In particular, Section 4.1 demonstrates that there exists
a ﬁnite adoption level for all N (i.e., sup
N∈ N
π∗N < ∞ ). More-
over, Section 4.2 clariﬁes that the referenced bound falls
below transaction volumes for traditional payment systems
for any reasonable model parameters. The implication of
our ﬁndings is thus that Bitcoin is unlikely to replace tra-
ditional centralized payment systems.
4.1. Absolute bound on adoption level
There exists a bound on Bitcoin’s adoption level that
applies uniformly for all N:
Proposition 6 . Finite Bound on Adoption Level
There exists a ﬁnite bound on the total adoption level that
applies uniformly across all levels of transaction demand. (i.e.,
sup
N∈ N
π∗N < ∞ ) .
Proposition 6 arises because an increase in the adoption
level, π∗N, implies an increase in the endogenous fee level
for the marginal user, φ(c ∗) . In turn, any adoption level
beyond a particular ﬁnite bound cannot arise in equilib-
rium because any such adoption level implies a fee level
that is too excessive to be consistent with such adoption
levels.
More formally, Proposition 1 (C) implies the following:
R 1 · (
c ∗ −c
c −c
) α ·N α +R 0
  
Ut ilit y F rom Bitcoin
≥ N −1
c −c
× c 2
∗ −c 2
2/Lambda1  
Marginal User F ee
(9)
which states that the endogenous utility from using Bitcoin
must exceed the fee paid for the marginal user. Then, using
Eq. (2) and applying some algebra yields:
R 1 +
R 0
(π∗N) α ≥ N −1
N
× c ∗ + c
2/Lambda1× (π∗N) 1 −α (10)
which reveals that arbitrarily large adoption levels can-
not arise in equilibrium. In particular, letting the adop-
tion level grow arbitrarily (i.e., π∗N → ∞ ) in Eq. (10) yields
R 1 ≥∞  , which delivers a contradiction since user utility
from transacting via Bitcoin is ﬁnite (i.e., R 0 , R 1 ∈ R + ). Intu-
itively, arbitrarily large adoption levels generate arbitrarily
large fees such that only an inﬁnite utility from using Bit-
coin (i.e., R 1 = ∞ ) is consistent with arbitrarily large adop-
tion levels in equilibrium.
Proposition 6 takes the transaction rate as ﬁxed (i.e., /Lambda1
is a ﬁxed parameter), but that assumption is not neces-
sary for establishing a bound on the Bitcoin adoption level.
More explicitly, our next result generalizes Proposition 6 to
354

===== PAGE 9 =====

F.J. Hinzen, K. John and F. Saleh Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 347–369
the case that the transaction rate varies with transaction
demand:
Proposition 7 . Finite Bound on Adoption Level II
Suppose that Bitcoin’s transaction rate, /Lambda1N , varies with
transaction demand, N. Then, even in such a case, Bit-
coin faces a ﬁnite bound on its adoption level that ap-
plies uniformly across all levels of transaction demand. (i.e.,
sup
N∈ N
π∗N < ∞ ) .
Proposition 7 arises for a similar reason as
Proposition 3 . In particular, Bitcoin faces a dilemma
in the face of heightened transaction demand (i.e., when
N is large). Either Bitcoin keeps transaction rates too low
such that the congestion from fees ensures a ﬁnite bound
on its adoption level (as per Proposition 6 ) or Bitcoin in-
creases its transaction rate suﬃciently fast such that wait
times become prohibitive due to the need for consensus,
also generating a ﬁnite bound on its adoption level. More
formally, Proposition 1 (C) implies:
R 1 ·
(
c ∗ −c
c −c
)α
·N α + R 0
  
Ut ilit y F rom Bitcoin
≥ c ∗/Psi1(/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M))
  
Marginal Wait Disut ilit y
(11)
which states that the endogenous utility from using Bitcoin
must exceed the disutility from waiting incurred by the
marginal user. Then, applying Eq. (2) and /Psi1(/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M)) ≡
1
/Lambda1N + τ(/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M)) ≥ τ(/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M)) to Eq. (11) yields:
R 1 · (π∗N) α +R 0 ≥ c ∗τ(/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M)) (12)
and dividing through by (π∗N) α implies:
R 1 +
R 0
(π∗N) α ≥ c ∗τ(/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M))
(π∗N) α (13)
In our proof for Proposition 7 , we establish that the
transaction rate growing suﬃciently fast to avoid pro-
hibitive fees implies that c ∗τ(/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M))
(π∗·N) α → ∞ as the adop-
tion level grows arbitrarily large (i.e., π∗N → ∞ ). Con-
sequently, if the transaction rate grows suﬃciently fast
to avoid prohibitive fees, Eq. (13) implies R 1 ≥∞  , which
is a contradiction and thereby precludes arbitrarily large
adoption levels. Alternatively, if the transaction rate does
not grow suﬃciently fast to overcome prohibitive fees,
then the level of the fees themselves preclude arbitrarily
large adoption levels akin to the intuition given earlier for
Proposition 6 .
4.2. Practical adoption limits
We provide context regarding our previous analysis
with the following result:
Proposition 8 . Practical Limits of Adoption
Suppose that Bitcoin were to employ a transaction rate
suﬃcient to process 150 million transactions per day and that
Bitcoin’s network delay were bounded below by empirical es-
timates given in Croman et al. (2016) . Then, the following re-
sults hold:
(A) Each block would correspond to a fork with over 99%
probability and the blockchain would be in the state of
a fork with over 99% probability.
(B) As a consequence, the expected time for transaction
settlement would become prohibitive. More explicitly,
the expected time for transaction settlement would ex-
ceed one year.
Proposition 8 clariﬁes that the transaction rate neces-
sary for Bitcoin to achieve VISA’s US transaction volume
(i.e., 150 million transactions per day) implies a frequency
of forks such that user wait times become prohibitively
lengthy irrespective of model preference parameters (i.e.,
R 0 , R 1 , α, c , c ). In turn, any reasonable model parameters
are inconsistent with Bitcoin achieving such a transaction
volume and thus Bitcoin faces a practical limit to adoption
that renders it unlikely to compete with traditional pay-
ment systems.
To understand Proposition 8 , note that Bitcoin achiev-
ing an increased transaction volume would require Bit-
coin employing an increased transaction rate but an in-
creased transaction rate would imply a higher fork prob-
ability ( Proposition 8 (A)). The higher fork probability, in
turn, would imply a higher expected wait time due to
the need to achieve consensus on transaction settlement
( Proposition 8 (B)). While particular preference parameters
might be consistent with arbitrarily long settlement times
(e.g., R 0 , R 1 = ∞ ), we deem such model parameters as un-
reasonable because we do not consider it plausible that
users would be willing to wait arbitrarily long for trans-
action settlement of casual payments.
More concretely, Eq. (5) , which determines the fork
probability, is central to Proposition 8 . In particular, while
current transaction rates for Bitcoin imply a near-zero fork
probability, increasing Bitcoin’s transaction rate to tolerate
the demand of a traditional payment system would im-
ply that most blocks would result in a fork. Consequently,
most Bitcoin transactions would then be subjected to an
elongated settlement process, thereby undermining adop-
tion. We emphasize that a particular model-implied wait-
ing time computation is not as relevant as the order of
magnitude for wait times being unreasonably large when-
ever Bitcoin’s transaction rate is expedited to tolerate large
transaction demands.
To provide some practical context regarding the impli-
cations of persistent forks upon Bitcoin adoption, we turn
to the only well-known example of a persistent Bitcoin
fork. That fork demonstrates that persistent forks are a sig-
niﬁcant threat to widespread adoption in practice just as
our model predicts. To provide more detail, a fork arose
on the Bitcoin blockchain in March 2013 for technical rea-
sons, but that fork was not resolved quickly so that it was
persistent in a similar sense that forks generated in our
model due to high transaction rates are persistent. In re-
sponse to the fork, the largest cryptocurrency exchange at
the time, Mt. Gox, suspended Bitcoin transactions, induc-
ing a decline in Bitcoin usage. While Mt. Gox eventually
restored Bitcoin transactions, the cause of the March 2013
fork was known to be idiosyncratic and thus not indicative
of such a fork occurring in the future. In contrast, the forks
that would arise if Bitcoin’s transaction rate became too
rapid are not idiosyncratic as they would arise regularly
per our formal analysis. Mt. Gox’s reaction to the March
2013 fork thus suggests that forks arising from an expe-
355

===== PAGE 10 =====

F.J. Hinzen, K. John and F. Saleh Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 347–369
dited Bitcoin transaction rate would undermine adoption
more generally, which is consistent with our ﬁndings. 13
5. Overcoming limited adoption
Although our results establish limited adoption for Bit-
coin, our results do not imply that Bitcoin’s adoption rate
cannot be increased with centralization of Bitcoin mining.
Moreover, our results do not imply that more recent eco-
nomic designs of blockchains face limited adoption. We
discuss these points, in turn, in Sections 5.1 and 5.2 .
5.1. Bitcoin centralization
Lehar and Parlour (2020) and Cong et al. (2021a) high-
light that Bitcoin mining markets are partially centralized
in the sense that the majority of blocks are produced by
a few mining pools. While such partial centralization does
not preclude limited adoption (see Propositions 2 and 3 ),
it does enable Bitcoin to achieve higher adoption rates for
any ﬁnite level of transaction demand. We formalize this
point with the following result:
Proposition 9 . Partial Centralization of Mining Markets
Let πC
∗ denote the adoption rate of Bitcoin if the network
delay function is given by /Delta1C (M) . Let πD
∗ denote the adop-
tion rate of Bitcoin if the network delay function is given by
/Delta1D (M) . We assume that /Delta1C (M) ≤ /Delta1D (M) for all Ms o that
the former case reﬂects a (relatively) centralized mining mar-
ket in which information propagates more quickly. Then, the
adoption rate for the relatively centralized mining market ex-
ceeds that of the adoption rate for the relatively decentralized
mining market (i.e., πC
∗ ≥ πD
∗ ) .
Recall that M refers to the number of computer pro-
cessors irrespective of the mining market structure. Since
partial centralization of mining entails many such proces-
sors being controlled by the same entity, our model re-
ﬂects partial centralization through a reduction in the net-
work delay function (i.e., /Delta1C (M) ≤ /Delta1D (M) for all M). In
that context, Proposition 9 demonstrates that a relatively
centralized mining market implies a higher adoption rate
than a more decentralized mining market. Intuitively, a
relatively centralized mining market reduces not only the
network delay but also the probability of a fork. In turn,
a reduced fork probability implies a reduction in the ex-
pected settlement time for any transaction and thereby en-
ables a higher equilibrium adoption rate.
5.2. Beyond Bitcoin
Our ﬁnal result provides general context regarding over-
coming limited adoption:
Proposition 10 . Overcoming Limited Adoption
Suppose that the fork probability is given as follows:
P (F ork ) = p F (/Lambda1, /Delta1(M))
where p F : R + × R + ↦→ [0 , 1] is an arbitrary function.
13 For additional details regarding the March 2013 fork, the interested
reader may consult Biais et al. (2019) or Saleh (2021) .
If the fork probability is bounded away from unity
(i.e., sup
/Lambda1, /Delta1
p F (/Lambda1, /Delta1) < 1) , then widespread adoption (i.e.,
lim
N→∞
π∗ > 0) can be obtained in equilibrium even with an ar-
bitrarily large network (i.e., lim
N→∞
M = ∞ ) .
Proposition 10 clariﬁes that limited adoption can be
overcome if the fork probability is bounded away from
unity. This result arises because the fork probability be-
ing bounded away from unity implies that the consensus
wait time is bounded above and eventually decreases in
the blockchain’s transaction rate (see Lemma 7 ). In turn,
a suﬃciently large increase in the transaction rate reduces
both consensus wait times and overall wait times, thereby
enabling widespread adoption.
We conclude by discussing some prominent blockchain
proposals that seek to improve upon Bitcoin. We discuss
those proposals in the context of this paper’s ﬁndings.
5.2.1. An expedited transaction rate
Several proposals aim to improve upon Bitcoin by em-
ploying a design identical to Bitcoin except with an expe-
dited transaction rate. Such proposals are typically imple-
mented either by increasing block sizes (e.g., Bitcoin Cash)
or by increasing block rates (e.g., Litecoin). Our analysis
indicates that such proposals do not succeed at overcom-
ing limited adoption. In particular, Appendix A establishes
that the fork probability approaches unity as the transac-
tion rate diverges irrespective of whether the transaction
rate diverges due to an increase in the block rate or an in-
crease in the block size. Consequently, the consensus wait
time becomes prohibitive as the transaction rate diverges
irrespective of the implementation method for the increase
in the transaction rate. In turn, expediting the transaction
rate does not resolve the limited adoption problem as per
Proposition 3 .
While increasing the blockchain’s transaction
rate does not resolve the limited adoption problem,
Proposition 10 indicates that limited adoption may be
overcome by reﬁning the blockchain’s design to enable
a high transaction rate without a high fork probability.
Several blockchain proposals aim for such a reﬁnement.
The remainder of this section focuses on such proposals.
5.2.2. Bitcoin NG
Bitcoin NG, put forth by Eyal et al. (2015) , confers
authority to a single miner to add transactions to the
blockchain for a period of time known as an epoch . This
protocol differs from Bitcoin in that Bitcoin confers such
authority only for a single block. The described modiﬁca-
tion enables Bitcoin NG to achieve a lower fork probability
because a fork cannot arise within an epoch once the en-
tire network has learned which particular miner has the
authority to add blocks during the epoch.
Bitcoin NG confers authority to a miner to add trans-
actions in the same manner that Bitcoin selects a block to
be added to the blockchain. In particular, in both cases, a
miner must create a block which solves a computationally
intensive puzzle to receive the authority to add transac-
tions. In Bitcoin’s case, the transactions that can be added
to the blockchain must be included directly on the block
356

===== PAGE 11 =====

F.J. Hinzen, K. John and F. Saleh Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 347–369
that solves the puzzle. In contrast, in Bitcoin NG’s case,
the block that solves the puzzle identiﬁes a miner who
may add transactions to the blockchain for the duration of
the epoch, and no other miner may add transactions dur-
ing the epoch. Once the epoch concludes, Bitcoin NG con-
fers authority to another miner to add transactions for the
subsequent epoch in the same manner as for the previous
epoch.
Intuitively, Bitcoin NG achieves a reduction in the fork
probability by implementing a temporary centralization of
authority. More explicitly, each epoch corresponds to a pe-
riod in which a single miner has a monopoly with regard
to adding transactions to the blockchain. As a consequence,
a fork cannot arise within an epoch for the same reason
that a fork would not arise in general in a centralized set-
ting. It is noteworthy that Bitcoin NG may maintain a fork
probability bounded away from unity even when expand-
ing its transaction rate by extending the duration of each
epoch.
5.2.3. Modern proof-of-stake protocols
The previously referenced concept of dividing time into
epochs and pre-specifying authority to add transactions
within the epoch has been used in many recent blockchain
proposals. A key distinguishing factor between some of
those recent proposals and Bitcoin NG is that recent pro-
posals generally do not confer authority on the basis of
computational puzzles. Rather, most recent proposals con-
fer such authority on the basis of lotteries over outstanding
cryptocurrency units (or a subset of those units) with the
lottery winners receiving the authority to add blocks to the
blockchain and the blocks including transactions. Such re-
cent proposals are referred to as employing a Proof-of-Stake
(PoS) protocol because an agent’s likelihood of receiving
the authority to add blocks depends upon her stake where
stake refers to cryptocurrency holdings. 14
The particular concept of having a single agent deter-
mine all transactions within an epoch has been employed
by some PoS blockchains (see, e.g., Pass and Shi, 2018 ), but
many others employ a further modiﬁcation that entails di-
viding each epoch into slots where each slot corresponds
to a single block. In such a case, each slot is assigned to
an agent based on independent lotteries, and all lotteries
for slots within a particular epoch occur at the beginning
of that epoch. This process of specifying which agent may
add a block in each slot of the epoch keeps the fork proba-
bility low because of the lack of ambiguity regarding which
agent may add a block in a particular slot. Moreover, the
number of slots within each epoch may be increased when
increasing the transaction rate to keep the fork probability
bounded away from unity.
5.2.4. Permissioned blockchains
Another method to enable high transaction rates with-
out inducing a high fork probability is to specify the under-
lying blockchain as a permissioned blockchain. A permis-
sioned blockchain differs from Bitcoin and PoS blockchains
14 A discussion of PoS is beyond the scope of this paper. The interested
reader may consult Saleh (2021) for details.
in that the set of agents who may participate in the pro-
cess of creating blocks is set in an exogenous fashion.
Moreover, this set is typically kept to a small number, and
an eﬃcient process is speciﬁed for the agents within the
set to arrive at consensus on blocks.
One process frequently used for generating consensus
in a permissioned blockchain is Practical Byzantine Fault
Tolerance (PBFT). PBFT, introduced by Castro et al. (1999) ,
entails one agent being designated as the leader where
only the leader can propose new blocks. Consequently, a
permissioned blockchain with PBFT can operate at high
transaction rates while avoiding a high fork probability.
6. Conclusion
Bitcoin was created with the ambition of becoming
a widely-adopted decentralized payment system. To date,
Bitcoin has fallen short of that goal. Our paper examines
Bitcoin’s goal in the context of its design and ﬁnds the for-
mer incompatible with the latter. In particular, we ﬁnd that
limited adoption is an equilibrium outcome for Bitcoin.
Nonetheless, we emphasize that our work does not
imply limited adoption universally across all blockchains.
Rather, our results apply only to Bitcoin and similar
blockchains, thereby highlighting the need for economic
analysis of blockchains other than Bitcoin. As discussed
within Section 5.2 , some blockchain proposals that show
promise to overcome limited adoption include Bitcoin
NG, modern Proof-of-Stake protocols and Permissioned
blockchains. 15 We hope that researchers will extend our
framework to formally examine those ideas in the future.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known compet-
ing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could
have appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this pa-
per.
Acknowledgments
Ron Kaniel was the editor for this article. We thank
the editor and two anonymous referees for many helpful
suggestions. We also thank Anup Agrawal, Yakov Amihud,
Daniel Andrei, Bruno Biais, Jaroslav Borovicka, Matthieu
Bouvard, Agostino Capponi, Lin William Cong, Kathleen
DeRose, Sean Foley, Vishal Gaur, Thomas George, Manasa
Gopal, Hanna Halaburda, Rick Harris, Iftekhar Hasan, Joel
Hasbrouck, Craig Holden, Sabrina Howell, Gur Huberman,
Felix Irresberger, Ari Juels, Steven Kou, Jongsub Lee, Doron
Levit, Jiasun Li, Tao Li, Ye Li, Laura Xiaolei Liu, Evgeny Lyan-
dres, Katya Malinova, Bill Marcum, David Musto, Shunya
Noda, Maureen O’Hara, Andreas Park, Christine Parlour,
Ajay Patel, Thomas Rivera, Alberto Rossi, Bryan Routledge,
Ville Savolainen, Zhan Shi, Chester Spatt, Deon Strickland,
Raghu Sundaram, Charles Trzcinka, Gerry Tsoukalas, Larry
Wall, Baolian Wang, Chaojun Wang, Warren Weber, Danxia
15 For technical details on such proposals and other potential solutions
for limited adoption, we direct readers to Zhou et al. (2020) .
357

===== PAGE 12 =====

F.J. Hinzen, K. John and F. Saleh Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 347–369
Xie, Baozhong Yang, David Yermack and Zhen Zhou, as
well as seminar participants at Georgetown University, In-
diana University, NYU Stern, Peking University, Tsinghua
PBC School of Finance, Tsinghua School of Social Sciences,
University of Florida, University of Georgia, University of
Houston, Wake Forest University and conference partici-
pants at the 2019 Conference on Financial Economics and
Accounting, the 2020 American Finance Association meet-
ing, the 2020 Midwest Finance Association meeting, the
2020 European Finance Association meeting and the 2020
Tokenomics Conference for valuable comments.
Appendix A. Fork probability
As explained in Section 2.3 , a valid block produced by
some Miner i does not correspond to a fork if no blocks
inconsistent with it are produced. Therefore:
P (F ork ) = 1 − P (
⋂
j
{ Miner j does not produce a v alid
inconsistent block } ) (A.1)
Recall that Miner j produces a valid block inconsistent
with Miner i ’s block if and only if Miner j produces a valid
block before receiving news of Miner i ’s block. Accordingly,
for Miner j’s next valid block to be consistent with Miner
i ’s valid block, Miner j must not generate a valid block in
the time that Miner i takes to communicate her block to
Miner j. Decker and Wattenhofer (2013) demonstrate that
this time, also known as the network delay between Min-
ers i and j, depends upon the amount of information being
sent and is approximately linear in the size of information
being sent. Thus, letting σ denote the block size (i.e., num-
ber of transactions per block) and /Delta1i,j denote the network
delay between Miners i and j for a block with one trans-
action, we have that:
Network Delay Between Miners i and j = σ × /Delta1i,j (A.2)
Further, letting X j denote the time until Miner j pro-
duces her next valid block (starting from the time at which
Miner i produces a valid block), we also have that:
{ Miner j does not produce a v al id inconsistent bl ock } =
{ X j > σ × /Delta1i,j } (A.3)
It is well known that each miner’s block production
process is independent (see, e.g., Narayanan et al., 2016 )
so that Eqs. (A .1) –(A .3) imply:
P (F ork ) = 1 −
∏
j
P ({ X j > σ × /Delta1i,j } ) (A.4)
As discussed within Sections 2.2 and 2.3 , each miner
produces valid blocks according to a Poisson process and
each miner corresponds to a computer processor of com-
parable hashing power. Thus, X j is an exponential ran-
dom variable with some parameter λ > 0 that denotes
the rate at which each miner produces valid blocks, and
Eq. (A.4) becomes:
P (F ork ) = 1 −
∏
j
e −λ×σ×/Delta1i,j (A.5)
Then, after some algebra, we have that:
P (F ork ) = 1 −e
−λ×M×σ× 1
M
∑
j
/Delta1i,j
(A.6)
Recall that λ denotes the block rate for an individ-
ual miner and M denotes the total number of miners so
that ρ ≡ λ ×M denotes the block rate for the entire min-
ing network. Additionally, since σ denotes the number of
transactions per block, /Lambda1≡ ρ × σ = λ ×M × σ equals the
blockchain’s transaction rate. Finally, as /Delta1i,j denotes the
network delay between Miners i and j for a normalized
single-transaction block, /Delta1(M) ≡ 1
M
∑
j
/Delta1i,j denotes the av-
erage network delay for a normalized single-transaction
block. 16 Then, a simple re-writing of Eq. (A.6) delivers
Eq. (5) :
P (F ork ) = 1 −e −/Lambda1/Delta1(M) (A.7)
Equivalence between Block Rates, ρ, and Block Sizes, σ
Our results establish an equivalence between modifying
block rates, ρ, and modifying block sizes, σ. In particular,
recall that /Lambda1= ρ × σ so that Eq. (A.7) implies:
P (F ork ) = 1 −e −ρ×σ×/Delta1(M) (A.8)
Formally, the block rate, ρ, and the block size, σ, enter
symmetrically within Eq. (A.8) so that a change in the for-
mer produces identical implications as a change in the lat-
ter. Accordingly, we may study implications of varying the
blockchain transaction rate, /Lambda1= ρ × σ, upon fork proba-
bilities without speciﬁc attention to whether the changes
in the transaction rate are achieved by modifying the block
rate, ρ, or the block size, σ.
To provide some intuition for this point, we remind the
reader that a fork arises when some Miner j produces a
valid block before receiving news of the prior valid block
by Miner i . Thus, intuitively, a fork arises for one of two
reasons: either Miner j produces a valid block too quickly,
or Miner i ’s block requires too long to communicate to the
network. Increasing the block rate, ρ, makes a fork more
likely due to the former reason, whereas increasing the
block size, σ, makes the fork more likely due to the latter
reason. In particular, a faster block rate implies that each
miner produces blocks at a faster rate (i.e., ρ ↑⇒ λ = ρ
M ↑ )
whereas a larger block size, σ, implies that Miner i ’s block
takes longer to communicate (i.e., σ ↑⇒ σ × /Delta1i,j ↑ ). In the
former case, the fork becomes more likely because the
likelihood that some Miner j produces a valid block too
quickly increases; in the latter case, the fork becomes more
likely because the time necessary for Miner i to communi-
cate with each Miner j ̸ = i elongates.
Appendix B. CTMC Blockchain model
We model the blockchain as a Continuous Time Markov
Chain (CTMC), { X t } t≥0 , with states x ∈ X ≡ { 0 , 1 , . . . , b} . In
our model, any state x < b corresponds to a state in which
the blockchain is in the midst of a fork whereas the state
x = b corresponds to the blockchain being in a state of con-
sensus. Recall that from a state of consensus (i.e., x = b),
16 As the Bitcoin network is not supposed to favor any participant rel-
ative to any other participant, we impose symmetry and drop the i sub-
script (i.e., /Delta1(M) = /Delta1i (M) ≡ 1
M
∑
j
/Delta1i,j ).
358

===== PAGE 13 =====

F.J. Hinzen, K. John and F. Saleh Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 347–369
the blockchain enters a fork if there are multiple blocks
generated at a given height. We denote the blockchain
state immediately after there is a disagreement on the
most recent block by x = 0 < b. As discussed in Section 2.3 ,
regaining consensus requires agreement on b consecutive
blocks, and we keep track of this transition through the
blockchain’s state by incrementing the blockchain state by
one with each consecutive block on which there is agree-
ment until the blockchain regains consensus (i.e., x = b) at
which point the state remains at x = b until there is dis-
agreement on a block. As at any other time, if there is a
disagreement on a block during the aforementioned tran-
sition period or after regaining consensus, the blockchain
state then changes to x = 0 .
Formally, the CTMC rate matrix, Q ∈ R X×X , character-
izes our model. For exposition, we deﬁne p(x, y ) = 1 −e −xy
and abuse notation by setting p ≡ p(/Lambda1, /Delta1) = 1 −e −/Lambda1/Delta1∈
(0 , 1) . Note that p corresponds to the fork probability (see
Eq. (5) ). Then, since blocks arrive at rate /Lambda1and only
the states x = 0 and x = b can transition back to them-
selves, we have that ∀ x ∈ X/ { 0 , b} : Q x,x = −/Lambda1. Moreover,
since there is disagreement over any block with probability
p and the blockchain transitions to state x = 0 upon such
disagreement, we have that ∀ x ∈ X/ { 0 } : Q x, 0 = /Lambda1p. Simi-
larly, since the state of the blockchain increments from x
to x + 1 until x = b whenever there is agreement on a block
(which occurs with probability 1 − p for any given block),
we have that ∀ x ∈ X/ { b} : Q x,x +1 = /Lambda1(1 − p) . Finally, triv-
ially, we have that Q b,b = −/Lambda1p, Q 0 , 0 = −/Lambda1(1 − p) and all
other entries of Q equal 0.
Lemma 1 . Stationary Distribution
{ πx } x ∈ X corresponds to the unique stationary distribution
with ∀ x < b : πx = p(1 − p) x and πb = (1 − p) b
Proof . Any stationary distribution, ˜ π ∈ R X , must satisfy
˜ πQ = 0 . The result follows from algebra. □
For exposition, we uniformize our CTMC. We let { Y t } t∈ N
denote the associated Discrete Time Markov Chain (DTMC)
and P ∈ R X×X denote the associated transition matrix.
Then, X t = Y N(t) with { N(t) } t≥0 being a Poisson Process
with rate /Lambda1.
Lemma 2 . Consensus Wait Times
We deﬁne T b ≡ inf { t ∈ N : Y t = b} . Then, the expected
block heights until fork resolution, s x = E [ T b | Y 0 = x ] , con-
ditional upon initial state, x ∈ X, satisﬁes ∀ x ∈ X : s x =
( 1 + s 0 p ) 1 −(1 −p) b−x
p ∀ x ∈ Xs o that s 0 = 1 −(1 −p) b
p(1 −p) b .
Proof . We prove the result by induction. s k −j =
(1 + s 0 p)
∑  j−1
i =0 (1 − p) i holds for j = 1 by deﬁnition. Then,
s k −(j+1) = 1 + (1 − p) s k −j + ps 0 = (1 + s 0 p)
∑  (j+1) −1
i =0 (1 −
p) i with the last equality following from the inductive
hypothesis. The conclusion then follows from algebra. □
Subsequently, we provide results useful for establishing
results within the body of our manuscript, which are sub-
sequently proved in Appendix C .
Lemma 3 . Monotone Consensus Wait Times
∀ x ∈ X/ { b} : s x > s x +1 ≥ 0
Proof . We prove the result by induction. By deﬁnition, ∀ x ∈
X/ { b} : s x = 1 + (1 − p) s x +1 + ps 0 so that s 0 > s 1 follows by
taking x = 0 . Then, by induction, s x = 1 + (1 − p) s x +1 +
ps 0 > 1 + (1 − p) s x +1 + ps x which implies s x > s x +1 as de-
sired. ∀ x ∈ X/ { b} : s x +1 ≥ 0 follows from s b = 0 . □
Hereafter, we deﬁne ∀ x ∈ X : s x (/Lambda1, /Delta1) ≡ s x (p) ≡
s x (p(/Lambda1, /Delta1)) and abuse notation  by using  s x to
mean the multivariate function. Similarly, we deﬁne
∀ x ∈ X : πx (/Lambda1, /Delta1) ≡ πx (p) ≡ πx (p(/Lambda1, /Delta1)) and abuse
notation by using πx to mean the multivariate function.
Lemma 4 . Monotone Consensus Wait Times Derivatives
∀ x ∈ X/ { b} : ds x
dp ≡ d
dp [ s x (p)] > ds x +1
dp ≡ d
dp [ s x +1 (p)] ≥ 0
Proof . We prove the result by induction. By deﬁnition,
∀ x ∈ X/ { b} : s x = 1 + (1 − p) s x +1 + ps 0 so that s 0 = 1
1 −p +
s 1 and thus ds 0
dp = 1
(1 −p) 2 + ds 1
dp > ds 1
dp . Then, s x = 1 + (1 −
p) s x +1 + ps 0 implies ds x
dp = (1 − p) ds x +1
dp −s x +1 + p ds 0
dp + s 0 .
Then, Lemma 3 gives that s 0 > s x +1 and the inductive hy-
pothesis gives that ds 0 )
dp > ds x
dp so that (1 − p) ds x +1
dp −s x +1 +
p ds 0
dp + s 0 > (1 − p) ds x +1
dp + p ds x
dp so that ds x
dp > (1 − p) ds x +1
dp +
p ds x
dp . The last equation further implies ds x
dp > ds x +1
dp , which
provides the inductive step and thereby establishes ds x
dp >
ds x +1
dp for all x ∈ X/ { b} . To complete the proof, we must
demonstrate that ds x +1
dp ≥ 0 for all x ∈ X/ { b} . This follows
immediately from s b = 0 , which itself follows from the def-
inition of s b . More precisely, since we already have ds x
dp >
ds x +1
dp for all x ∈ X/ { b} , then, for all x ∈ X/ { b} , ds x +1
dp ≥ ds b
dp =
0 . □
Lemma 5 . Monotone Consensus Wait Times Derivatives II
∀ x ∈ X/ { b} : ∂s x
∂/Lambda1> ∂s x +1
∂/Lambda1≥ 0 , ∂s x
∂/Delta1> ∂s x +1
∂/Delta1≥ 0
Proof . For all x ∈ X/ { b} , ∂s x
∂/Lambda1= ds x
dp
∂p
∂/Lambda1= ds x
dp /Delta1e −/Lambda1/Delta1. In turn:
∀ x ∈ X/ { b} :
∂s x
∂/Lambda1>
∂s x +1
∂/Lambda1≥ 0 ⇐⇒
ds x
dp
>
ds x +1
dp
≥ 0
so that ∀ x ∈ X/ { b} : ∂s x
∂/Lambda1> ∂s x +1
∂/Lambda1≥ 0 follows from Lemma 5 .
The proof for the second half of the lemma is similar.
More explicitly, for all x ∈ X/ { b} , ∂s x
∂/Delta1= ds x
dp
∂p
∂/Delta1= ds x
dp /Lambda1e −/Lambda1/Delta1.
In turn:
∀ x ∈ X/ { b} :
∂s x
∂/Delta1>
∂s x +1
∂/Delta1≥ 0 ⇐⇒
ds x
dp
>
ds x +1
dp
≥ 0
and thus ∀ x ∈ X/ { b} : ∂s x
∂/Delta1> ∂s x +1
∂/Delta1≥ 0 also follows from
Lemma 5 . □
We deﬁne ˜ τ ≡ E [ T b ] as the expected number of blocks
until fork resolution under the stationary distribution. We
further deﬁne τ ≡ E [
∑  T b
t=1 A t ] as the expected fork reso-
lution time under the stationary distribution with { A t } ∞
t=1
independent and exponentially distributed. Note that the
stationary distribution is given by { πx } x ∈ X , which is given
explicitly in Lemma 1 . Note also that Z i
d =
∑  T b
t=1 A t where Z i
denotes the expected fork resolution time for User i , and
that the distribution for all Z i are identical because we ini-
tialize our model with the stationary distribution.
359

===== PAGE 14 =====

F.J. Hinzen, K. John and F. Saleh Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 347–369
Note that τ ≡ E [
∑  T b
t=1 A t ] = E [ A 1 ] × E [ T b ] = 1
/Lambda1× ˜ τ,
because { A t } ∞
t=1 is an i.i.d sequence. More explicitly,
˜ τ = ˜ τ(p) ≡ ∑
x ∈ X s x (p) πx (p) , whereas τ = τ(p, /Lambda1) ≡∑
x ∈ X
s x (p)
/Lambda1πx (p) .
Lemma 6 . ˜ τ Increases in p
Let p, p ′ ∈ (0 , 1) such that p ≤ p ′ . Then, ˜ τ(p) ≤ ˜ τ(p ′ )
Proof . Recall that ˜ τ(p) =
∑
x ∈ X s x (p) πx (p) by deﬁnition.
Then, since Lemma 4 implies s x (p) ≤ s x (p ′ ) , we have that
˜ τ(p) =
∑
x ∈ X s x (p) πx (p) ≤ ∑
x ∈ X s x (p ′ ) πx (p) . Lemma 1 im-
plies that the stationary distribution characterized by
p ﬁrst-order stochastically dominates that character-
ized by p ′ , whereas Lemma 2 implies that s x is
a decreasing function of x ; these two results col-
lectively imply
∑
x ∈ X s x (p ′ ) πx (p) ≤ ∑
x ∈ X s x (p ′ ) πx (p ′ ) . 17 In
turn, ˜ τ(p) ≤ ∑
x ∈ X s x (p ′ ) πx (p) ≤ ∑
x ∈ X s x (p ′ ) πx (p ′ ) = ˜ τ(p ′ )
as desired. □
Lemma 7 . τ vanishes in /Lambda1if fork probability bounded away
from unity
Suppose that the fork probability is given by an arbitrary
function p F : R + × R + ↦→ [0 , 1] such that sup
/Lambda1, /Delta1
p F (/Lambda1, /Delta1) < 1 .
Then, for any sequence { /Lambda1N , /Delta1N } ∞
N=1 such that lim
N→∞
/Lambda1N = ∞ ,
we have that lim
N→∞
τ(p F (/Lambda1N , /Delta1N ) , /Lambda1N ) = 0 .
Proof . Lemma 6 implies that ˜ τ(p F (/Lambda1N , /Delta1N )) ≤
˜ τ( sup
/Lambda1, /Delta1
p F (/Lambda1, /Delta1)) < ∞ for all N so that
sup
N
˜ τ(p F (/Lambda1N , /Delta1N )) ≤ ˜ τ( sup
/Lambda1, /Delta1
p F (/Lambda1, /Delta1)) < ∞ . Then,
τ(p F (/Lambda1N , /Delta1N )) , /Lambda1N ) = 1
/Lambda1N × ˜ τ(p F (/Lambda1N , /Delta1N )) ≤
1
/Lambda1N × ˜ τ( sup
/Lambda1, /Delta1
p F (/Lambda1, /Delta1)) for any N implies
that lim sup
N→∞
τ(p F (/Lambda1N , /Delta1N ) , /Lambda1N ) ≤ lim sup
N→∞
(1
/Lambda1N ×
˜ τ( sup
/Lambda1, /Delta1
p F (/Lambda1, /Delta1))
)
= lim
N→∞
(1
/Lambda1N
)
× ˜ τ( sup
/Lambda1, /Delta1
p F (/Lambda1, /Delta1)) = 0 .
Finally, recall that τ is deﬁned as the expecta-
tion of a non-negative random variable so that
lim inf
N→∞
τ(p F (/Lambda1N , /Delta1N ) , /Lambda1N ) ≥ 0 holds trivially and thus
lim
N→∞
τ(p F (/Lambda1N , /Delta1N ) , /Lambda1N ) = 0 as desired. □
We deﬁne τ(/Lambda1, /Delta1) ≡ τ(p(/Lambda1, /Delta1) , /Lambda1) . Recall that
p(/Lambda1, /Delta1) = 1 −e −/Lambda1/Delta1which is the fork probability function
for Bitcoin (see Appendix A ). In turn, τ(/Lambda1, /Delta1) corre-
sponds speciﬁcally to Bitcoin’s consensus wait time.
When examining more general settings (e.g., Section 5.2,
Proposition 10 and Lemma 7 ), we explicitly acknowl-
edge the underlying fork probability function (e.g.,
τ = τ(p F ) = τ(p F (/Lambda1, /Delta1) , /Lambda1) for fork probability func-
tion p F ).
Lemma 8 . Lower Bound for τ
τ(/Lambda1, /Delta1) ≥ /Delta1e /Lambda1/Delta1−1
/Lambda1/Delta1
17 To see this point, note that ∑
x ∈ X s x (p ′ ) πx (p) and ∑
x ∈ X s x (p ′ ) πx (p ′ )
each correspond to expectations of the same random variable that takes
on values { s x (p ′ ) } x ∈ X . For each x ∈ X, s x (p ′ ) occurs with probability πx (p)
in the ﬁrst case and with probability πx (p ′ ) in the second case. Cru-
cially, as s x (p ′ ) decreases in x , the expectation is higher when taken with
respect to the distribution which is smaller in the sense of ﬁrst-order
stochastic dominance (i.e., ∑
x ∈ X s x (p ′ ) πx (p) ≤ ∑
x ∈ X s x (p ′ ) πx (p ′ ) ).
Proof . τ(/Lambda1, /Delta1) ≥ /Delta1s 0 (/Lambda1, /Delta1)
/Lambda1/Delta1π0 (/Lambda1, /Delta1) = /Delta1e /Lambda1/Delta1b −1
/Lambda1/Delta1≥ /Delta1e /Lambda1/Delta1−1
/Lambda1/Delta1
as desired. □
We deﬁne /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1) ≡ τ(/Lambda1, /Delta1) + 1
/Lambda1= τ(p(/Lambda1, /Delta1) , /Lambda1) +
1
/Lambda1which equates with the expected wait time for the
marginal user (i.e., Type c i = c ∗). Unless explicitly stated
otherwise (e.g., Proposition 10 ), we use p(/Lambda1, /Delta1) = 1 −
e −/Lambda1/Delta1, which is Bitcoin’s fork probability function.
Lemma 9 . /Psi1reduces in Centralization
Let /Delta1C : R + ↦→ R + and /Delta1D : R + ↦→ R + denote network
delay functions such that /Delta1C (M) ≤ /Delta1D (M) for all M. Then,
/Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1C (M)) ≤ /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1D (M)) for all /Lambda1, M ≥ 0 .
Proof . By deﬁnition, /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1i (M)) = τ(p(/Lambda1, /Delta1i (M))) +
1
/Lambda1= 1
/Lambda1· ˜ τ(p(/Lambda1, /Delta1i (M))) + 1
/Lambda1for i ∈ { C, D } . Then,
p(/Lambda1, /Delta1) = 1 −e −/Lambda1/Delta1implies that p(/Lambda1, /Delta1C (M)) ≤
p(/Lambda1, /Delta1D (M)) so that Lemma 6 implies ˜ τ(p(/Lambda1, /Delta1C (M))) ≤
˜ τ(p(/Lambda1, /Delta1D (M)) . In turn, /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1C (M)) = 1
/Lambda1·
˜ τ(p(/Lambda1, /Delta1C (M))) + 1
/Lambda1≤ 1
/Lambda1· ˜ τ(p(/Lambda1, /Delta1D (M))) + 1
/Lambda1=
/Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1D (M)) as desired. □
Lemma 10 . Increasing Wait Time in M
∀ M ′ > M ≥ 0 : /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M ′ )) − /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M)) =
τ(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M ′ )) − τ(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M)) > 0
Proof . /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M ′ )) − /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M))
= τ(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M ′ )) − τ(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M))
=
∑
x ∈ X
{ s x (/Lambda1, /Delta1(M ′ ))
/Lambda1πx (/Lambda1, /Delta1(M ′ )) −
s x (/Lambda1, /Delta1(M))
/Lambda1πx (/Lambda1, /Delta1(M)) }
≥ ∑
x ∈ X
s x (/Lambda1, /Delta1(M ′ )) −s x (/Lambda1, /Delta1(M))
/Lambda1 πx (/Lambda1, /Delta1(M))
=
∑
x ∈ X
1
/Lambda1
M ′ ∫
M
∂s x
∂/Delta1| /Delta1=/Delta1(m ) /Delta1′ (m ) dm πx (/Lambda1, /Delta1(M))
> 0 □
Lemma 11 . Zero Wait
τ(/Lambda1, 0) = 0
Proof . τ(/Lambda1, 0) = s k (/Lambda1, 0) = 0 □
Appendix C. Proofs for results in main text
Appendix C.1 derives Proposition 1 , which estab-
lishes equilibrium existence. Appendix C.2 then de-
rives preliminary lemmas that are necessary for prov-
ing the results stated within Sections 3 –5 . Our proofs of
Propositions 2 and 3 rely upon Propositions 6 and 7 re-
spectively, so we derive our results in this Appendix in a
different order than that which the results are stated in
the manuscript. More explicitly, we ﬁrst derive the results
from Section 4 in Appendix C.3 and then derive all other
results in Appendix C.4 . Our ordering of proofs within this
Appendix ensures that each proof relies only upon results
derived earlier within the Appendices.
C1. Proof of Proposition 1
Proof . For coherence of our discussion, we must specify
an initial distribution for our Blockchain CTMC model. We
specify that distribution as the stationary distribution as
360

===== PAGE 15 =====

F.J. Hinzen, K. John and F. Saleh Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 347–369
derived in Lemma 1 . The interested reader may consult
Appendix B for additional details.
We proceed as follows: ﬁrst, we assume that users take
the equilibrium objects c ∗ and M as given and establish
that (A) gives the equilibrium fee function in that con-
text. Then, we demonstrate that (B)–(D) must hold. Finally,
we demonstrate existence of c ∗ and M that satisfy (B)–(D),
thereby completing the proof.
Establishing (A) given c ∗ and M
Deﬁnition 1 (iii) requires that the equilibrium fee func-
tion, φ, satisﬁes:
φ(c i ) = arg max
f≥0
R 1 · (π∗N) α + R 0 −c i · E [ W (f, f −i )] − f
(C.1)
for c i ≤ c ∗. Then, since transactions are processed
in descending fee order and blocks are unit-sized,
Deﬁnition 1 (iv) implies:
E [ W (f, f −i )] =
1
/Lambda1× E [
∑
j : j ̸ = i
I{ f j > f} ] + E [ Z i ] (C.2)
where the ﬁrst term on the right-hand side represents the
wait due to higher-priority users and the second term on
the right-hand side represents the stationary expected wait
time due to the need for miners to attain consensus.
Per Deﬁnition 1 (iii), each user who does not adopt
Bitcoin (i.e., any User j such that c j > c ∗) optimally pays
zero fees. Consequently, f j > f ≥ 0 implies c j ≤ c ∗ and thus
Eq. (C.2) can be re-written as:
E [ W (f, f −i )] =
1
/Lambda1× E [
∑
j : j ̸ = i
I{ c ∗ ≥ c j , f j > f} ] + E [ Z i ]
(C.3)
Note that Deﬁnition 1 (ii) imposes that each user an-
ticipates that adopting users (i.e., any User j such that
c j ∈ [ c , c ∗] ) select fees according to the equilibrium fee
function, φ. As a consequence, f j = φ(c j ) for all j so that
Eq. (C.3) becomes:
E [ W (f, f −i )] =
1
/Lambda1× E [
∑
j : j ̸ = i
I{ c ∗ ≥ c j , φ(c j ) > f} ] + E [ Z i ]
(C.4)
Then, using { c j } N
j=1 being i.i.d yields:
E [ W (f, f −i )] = E [ W (f, φ(c −i )]=
N −1
/Lambda1×P { c ∗ ≥ c j , φ(c j )
> f} + E [ Z i ] (C.5)
We follow prior literature and restrict ourselves to
φ being strictly increasing  over the set of adopting
users. Hence, the inverse of φ, φ−1 , is well-deﬁned and
Eq. (C.5) becomes:
E [ W (f, f −i )] = E [ W (f, φ(c −i )]
=
N −1
/Lambda1×P { c ∗ > c j >φ−1 (f ) }++ E [ Z i ] (C.6)
Since c j ∼U[ c , c ] , Eq. (C.6) simpliﬁes to:
E [ W (f, f −i )] = E [ W (f, φ(c −i )]
=
N −1
/Lambda1×max
{
c ∗ − φ−1 (f )
c −c
, 0
}
+ E [ Z i ]
(C.7)
Applying Eq. (C.7) to Eq. (C.1) then yields:
φ(c i ) = arg max
f≥0
/Gamma1− c i · (N −1)
/Lambda1
×max {
c ∗ − φ−1 (f )
c −c
, 0 } − f (C.8)
where /Gamma1= R 1 · (π∗N) α + R 0 −c i · E [ Z i ] does not depend
upon User i ’s fee choice. Note that paying f i > φ(c ∗) is
dominated by paying f i = φ(c ∗) because paying f i = φ(c ∗)
ensures a user the highest priority with probability one; in
particular, paying f i > φ(c ∗) does not reduce wait time rel-
ative to f i = φ(c ∗) and thus only reduces user utility rela-
tive to f i = φ(c ∗) because f i > φ(c ∗) entails higher disutil-
ity from the higher fee payment. As a consequence, with-
out loss of generality, we can restrict the fee optimization
problem to f ∈ [0 , φ(c ∗)] and Eq. (C.8) thereby becomes:
φ(c i ) = arg max
f∈ [0 ,φ(c ∗ )]
/Gamma1− c i · (N −1)
/Lambda1× c ∗ − φ−1 (f )
c −c
− f
(C.9)
Then, taking the ﬁrst order condition yields:
c i · (N −1)
/Lambda1· ( c −c )
× 1
φ′ (φ−1 (f i ))
−1 = 0 (C.10)
where f i is User i ’s optimal fee. In equilibrium, per
Deﬁnition 1 (ii), we must have f i = φ(c i ) so that
Eq. (C.10) then becomes:
c i · (N −1)
/Lambda1· ( c −c )
× 1
φ′ (c i )
−1 = 0 (C.11)
Note that Eq. (C.11) represents a differential equa-
tion that the equilibrium fee function must satisfy. In par-
ticular, after some algebra, Eq. (C.11) becomes:
φ′ (c i ) =
c i · (N −1)
/Lambda1· ( c −c )
(C.12)
Note that φ( c ) = 0 must hold in any equilibrium where
φ is strictly increasing over [ c , c ] . This is because φ strictly
increasing over [ c , c ] implies that any User j with c j = c
receives service with the lowest priority with probability
one. In turn, any strictly positive fee by a User j with c j = c
is dominated by paying a zero fee because the lower fee
directly increases User j’s utility without increasing her ex-
pected wait time. Then, solving (C.12) explicitly and impos-
ing φ( c ) = 0 yields:
φ(c) =
N −1
c −c
× c 2 −c 2
2/Lambda1 (C.13)
for c ≤ c ∗. Note that φ(c) = 0 when c > c ∗ because, per
Deﬁnition 1 (i), we subsequently determine c ∗ such that
any User i with c i > c ∗ prefers the traditional alternative.
Consequently, any User i with c i > c ∗ optimally selects a
fee φ(c i ) = 0 . Explicitly, φ is given as follows:
361

===== PAGE 16 =====

F.J. Hinzen, K. John and F. Saleh Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 347–369
φ(c)=
N −1
c −c
× c 2 −c 2
2/Lambda1if c ≤ c ∗ and φ(c) = 0 otherwise
(C.14)
which proves (A).
Establishing (B) - (D)
Deﬁnition 1 (ii) and (v) imply:
βM = B + E [
∑
i
φ(c i )] (C.15)
Then, invoking symmetry of user types (i.e., c i are i.i.d)
yields:
βM = B + N × E [ φ(c 1 )] (C.16)
Further, invoking our solution for φ from Eqs. (C.14) ,
(C.16) becomes:
βM = B + N
c ∗∫
c
(N −1
c −c
× c 2 −c 2
2/Lambda1
)
× 1
c −c
dc (C.17)
Evaluating the integral on the right-hand side and di-
viding by β then establishes (B):
M = M(c ∗) ≡ B
β +
N(N −1)
6 β/Lambda1
(c ∗ −c ) · (c 2
∗ + c ∗c −2 c 2 )
( c −c ) 2
(C.18)
To establish (C), note that if c ∗ ∈ ( c , c ) , then for arbitrar-
ily small ε > 0 , Deﬁnition 1 (i) and (ii) imply that adopting
users (i.e., any User c i such that c i ≤ c ∗) ﬁnd adoption op-
timal. More formally, the following equation must hold:
max
f≥0
(
R 1 ·(π∗N) α + R 0 −(c ∗−ε) ·E [ W (f, φ(c −i ))] −f
)
≥0
(C.19)
Moreover, Deﬁnition 1 (i) and (ii) also imply that non-
adopting users (i.e., any User c i such that c i > c ∗) ﬁnd non-
adoption optimal so that the following equation must also
hold:
max
f≥0
(
R 1 ·(π∗N) α +R 0 −(c ∗ + ε)·E [ W (f, φ(c −i ))]−f
)
< 0
(C.20)
Then, taking ε → 0 + in both Eqs. (C.19) and (C.20) col-
lectively imply that the marginal user (i.e., any User c i
such that c i = c ∗) is indifferent between adoption and non-
adoption:
max
f≥0
(
R 1 · (π∗N) α + R 0 −c ∗ · E [ W (f, φ(c −i ))] − f
)
= 0
(C.21)
In turn, applying Deﬁnition 1 (ii) and (iii) which re-
quires that the marginal user pay the optimal fee (i.e.,
f i = φ(c ∗) for any User i such that c i = c ∗) implies:
R 1 · (π∗N) α + R 0 −c ∗ · E [ W (φ(c ∗) , φ(c −i ))] − φ(c ∗) = 0
(C.22)
Recall that the marginal user pays the highest fee (i.e.,
φ is increasing over [ c , c ∗] and zero thereafter) so that,
with probability one, she does not have to wait for any
other users to receive service ahead of her. As a conse-
quence, her wait equals the sum of her individual ser-
vice time, 1
/Lambda1, and the consensus wait time, τ(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M)) .
Then, since /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M)) ≡ 1
/Lambda1+ τ(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M)) , Eq. (C.22) be-
comes:
R 1 · (π∗N) α + R 0 −c ∗ · /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M)) − φ(c ∗) = 0 (C.23)
and applying Eq. (2) and the previously derived results (A)
and (B) to Eq. (C.23) then yields:
R 1 ·
((
c ∗ −c
c −c
)
·N
)α
+ R 0 = c ∗ · /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M(c ∗)))
+
N −1
c −c
× c 2
∗ −c 2
2/Lambda1(C.24)
which establishes (C). Note that (C) employs the hy-
pothesis R 1 ·N α + R 0 < c · /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M( c ))) + (N −1) × c + c
2/Lambda1,
which we have not yet used. This hypothesis will be em-
ployed in the last part of this proof to establish existence
of c ∗ and M that satisfy all equilibrium conditions.
Turning to (D), note that Deﬁnition 1 (i) implies that,
if c ∗ = c , then any User i with c i = c must ﬁnd adoption
optimal:
max
f≥0
(
R 1 · (π∗N) α + R 0 −c · E [ W (f, f −i )] − f
)
≥ 0 (C.25)
Deﬁnition 1 (ii) then implies that User i anticipates all
other user fees are given by the equilibrium fee function
(i.e., f −i = φ(c −i ) ) so that Eq. (C.25) implies:
max
f≥0
(
R 1 · (π∗N) α + R 0 −c · E [ W (f, φ(c −i ))] − f
)
≥ 0
(C.26)
In turn, Deﬁnition 1 (ii) and (iii) collectively imply that
any User i with c i = c selects her fee optimally (i.e., f i =
φ( c ) when c i = c ) so that Eq. (C.26) implies:
R 1 · (π∗N) α + R 0 −c · E [ W (φ( c ) , φ(c −i ))] − φ( c ) ≥ 0
(C.27)
Recall that φ is increasing over [ c , c ∗] and hence over
[ c , c ] when c ∗ = c . In turn, a User i with c i = c receives
service ﬁrst with probability one whenever c ∗ = c and
her wait equals /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M)) . Consequently, Eq. (C.27) be-
comes:
R 1 · (π∗N) α + R 0 −c · /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M)) − φ( c ) ≥ 0 (C.28)
Further, applying Eq. (2) and the previously derived re-
sults (A) and (B) to Eq. (C.28) with c ∗ = c then yields:
R 1 ·N α + R 0 ≥ c · /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M( c ))) + (N −1) × c + c
2/Lambda1
(C.29)
which is the hypothesis for (D). Note that (D) asserts that
this hypothesis implies a full adoption equilibrium (i.e.,
c ∗ = c ). Thus far, we have shown only that this hypoth-
esis is the condition for adoption to be optimal for any
User i with c i = c in a full adoption equilibrium (i.e., when
c ∗ = c ). To complete this portion of the proof, we must
demonstrate that Eq. (C.29) implies also that adoption is
optimal for any User i such that c i < c . As we demonstrate
362

===== PAGE 17 =====

F.J. Hinzen, K. John and F. Saleh Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 347–369
subsequently, that fact follows from the user utility of an
adopting user decreasing in c i . More formally, we let U de-
note the user utility of any adopting User i (i.e., c ≤ c ∗) in
any equilibrium with cut-off c ∗ so that U is given as fol-
lows:
U(c, c ∗) ≡ max
f≥0
(
R 1 ·
((
c ∗ −c
c −c
)
·N
)α
+ R 0
−c · E [ W (f, φ(c −i ))] − f
)
(C.30)
and we let ˜ U denote the utility of any adopting User i (i.e.,
c ≤ c ∗) when she selects fee f so that ˜ U is given as fol-
lows:
˜ U (c, f, c ∗) ≡ R 1 ·
((
c ∗−c
c −c
)
·N
)α
+ R 0 −c·E [ W (f, φ(c −i ))] −f (C.31)
Deﬁnitions 1 (ii) and (iii) require that User i ’s fee is
set optimally (i.e., f i = φ(c i ) ) so that the following equa-
tion holds for any c i ≤ c ∗ in any equilibrium:
U(c i , c ∗) = ˜ U (c i , φ(c i ) , c ∗) (C.32)
Then, differentiating with respect to c yields:
∂U(c i , c ∗)
∂c
=
∂ ˜ U (c i , φ(c i ) , c ∗)
∂c
+
∂ ˜ U (c i , φ(c i ) , c ∗)
∂f
×dφ(c i )
dc
(C.33)
Note that the ﬁrst-order condition in the derivation of
(A) implies that ∂ ˜ U (c i ,φ(c i ) ,c ∗)
∂f = 0s o that direct com puta-
tion from Eqs. (C.31) and (C.33) yield:
∂U(c i , c ∗)
∂c
=
∂ ˜ U (c i , φ(c i ) , c ∗)
∂c
=− E [ W (φ(c i ) , φ(c −i ))] < 0
(C.34)
Recall that Eq. (C.28) corresponds to the condition that
any User i with c i = c ﬁnds adoption optimal in a full
adoption equilibrium (i.e., when c ∗ = c ). More formally,
Eq. (C.28) is equivalent to U( c , c ) ≥ 0 so that Eq. (C.34) im-
plies that adoption is optimal for all Users (i.e., U(c i , c ) ≥ 0
for all c i ≤ c ), which thus establishes (D).
Existence of c ∗ and M
As just shown, when Eq. (C.28) holds, then a full adop-
tion equilibrium arises. In such an equilibrium, solutions
for c ∗ and M are given explicitly by:
c ∗ = c , M = M( c ) (C.35)
When Eq. (C.28) does not hold, then a full adoption
equilibrium cannot arise since Eq. (C.28) is the condition
for a User i with c i = c to ﬁnd adoption optimal and there-
fore is a necessary condition for a full adoption equilib-
rium. Consequently, in such a case, only an equilibrium
such that c ∗ ∈ ( c , c ) can arise. We subsequently demon-
strate the existence of such an equilibrium. More for-
mally, we demonstrate existence of c ∗ and M such that
(B) and (C) both hold. Note that (A) holds for any given
c ∗ and (D) is not relevant because it applies only when
Eq. (C.28) holds. In turn, existence of c ∗ and M satisfying
(B) and (C) suﬃces to establish existence of an equilibrium
for model parameters such that Eq. (C.28) does not hold.
Note that Eq. (C.28) corresponds to a User i such that
c i = c ﬁnding not adopting optimal whenever c ∗ = c . More
formally, in this case, the following equation must hold:
U( c , c ) < 0 (C.36)
Recall that we impose R 0 > c · ( 1
/Lambda1+ τ(/Lambda1, /Delta1( B
β ))) ,
which ensures that adopting is optimal whenever c ∗ = c
(i.e., non-adoption for all users is not an equilibrium).
Explicitly, R 0 > c · ( 1
/Lambda1+ τ(/Lambda1, /Delta1( B
β ))) is equivalent to:
U( c , c ) > 0 (C.37)
Then, Eqs. (C.36) - (C.37) , and continuity of U ∗(c) ≡
U(c, c) implies the existence of ˜ c ∗ ∈ ( c , c ) such that
U ∗( ˜ c ∗) = 0 . Note that U ∗( ˜ c ∗) = 0 is equivalent to (C) if
Eq. (C.28) does not hold. In turn, the equilibrium c ∗ and
M are given explicitly as follows:
c ∗ = ˜ c ∗, M = M( ˜ c ∗) (C.38)
where the latter equation satisﬁes (B) and thereby com-
pletes the proof. □
C2. Preliminary lemmas
Lemma 12 . Interior Adoption Rate For Large N
Suppose that the transaction rate, /Lambda1> 0 , is ﬁxed. Then,
there exists N > 0 such that for all N > N , we have the fol-
lowing:
R 1 ·N α + R 0 < c · /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M( c ))) + (N −1) × c + c
2/Lambda1
where M(c) is deﬁned explicitly in Proposition 1 .
Proof . α ∈ (0 , 1) implies that lim
N→∞
N−1
N α = ∞ which further
implies:
lim
N→∞
(
R 1 ·N α + R 0 − (N −1) × c + c
2/Lambda1
)
= −∞ (C.39)
In turn, that implies that there exists N such that for all
N > N , we have the following:
R 1 ·N α + R 0 < (N −1) × c + c
2/Lambda1 (C.40)
and since c · /Psi1(/Lambda1, M( c )) ≥ 0 , we also have the following
for N > N :
R 1 ·N α + R 0 < c · /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M( c ))) + (N −1) × c + c
2/Lambda1
(C.41)
which completes the proof. □
Lemma 13 . Interior Adoption Rate For Large NA n d Variable
Transaction Rate, /Lambda1N
Suppose that the transaction rate, /Lambda1N > 0 , is a function of
transaction demand, N. Then, there exists N > 0 such that for
all N > N , we have the following:
R 1 ·N α + R 0 < c · /Psi1(/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M( c ))) + (N −1) × c + c
2/Lambda1N
where M(c) is deﬁne explicitly in Proposition 1 .
Proof . We prove this result by contradiction. In particular,
if there did not exist an N as described in the statement of
363

===== PAGE 18 =====

F.J. Hinzen, K. John and F. Saleh Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 347–369
this lemma, then there must be inﬁnitely many values of
N such that:
R 1 ·N α + R 0 ≥ c · /Psi1(/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M( c ))) + (N −1) × c + c
2/Lambda1N
(C.42)
and we demonstrate that this is not possible.
Note that if there existed inﬁnitely many N such that
Eq. (C.42) held for all those N, then we could form a sub-
sequence indexed by N k such that:
R 1 ·N α
k + R 0 ≥ c · /Psi1(/Lambda1N k , /Delta1(M( c ))) + (N k −1) × c + c
2/Lambda1N k
(C.43)
for all k and lim
k →∞
N k = ∞ . On that sub-sequence, either
lim inf
k →∞
N 1 −α
k
/Lambda1N k
= ∞ or lim inf
k →∞
N 1 −α
k
/Lambda1N k
< ∞ . We subsequently
consider each case and demonstrate that each implies a
contradiction, thereby establishing the lemma.
Case 1: lim inf
k →∞
N 1 −α
k
/Lambda1N k
= ∞
Equation (C.43) implies:
R 1 ·N α
k + R 0 ≥ (N k −1) × c + c
2/Lambda1N k
(C.44)
Equation (C.44) can be re-written as:
R 1 ·N α
k + R 0 ≥ N k −1
N k
×N k × c + c
2/Lambda1N k
(C.45)
Then, dividing each side of Eq. (C.45) by N α
k yields:
R 1 +
R 0
N α
k
≥ N k −1
N k
×N 1 −α
k × c + c
2/Lambda1N k
(C.46)
Note that inf
k
(
N k −1
N k ×N 1 −α
k × c + c
2/Lambda1N k
)
≥ c + c
2 ×inf
k
N k −1
N k ×
inf
k
N 1 −α
k
/Lambda1N k
≥ c + c
4 ×inf
k
N 1 −α
k
/Lambda1N k
where the last inequality follows
because N k ≥ 2 for all k implies N k −1
N k ≥ 1
2 for all k . As a
consequence, Eq. (C.46) implies:
R 1 +
R 0
N α
k
≥ c + c
4
×inf
k
N 1 −α
k
/Lambda1N k
(C.47)
Taking limits on both sides as k → ∞ implies R 1 = ∞ ,
which yields the desired contradiction since R 1 is a ﬁnite
model parameter.
Case 2: lim inf
k →∞
N 1 −α
k
/Lambda1N k
< ∞
Note that there must exist a further sub-sequence of
the sub-sequence indexed by N k l such that the further sub-
sequence converges to lim inf
k →∞
N 1 −α
k
/Lambda1N k
. Denoting the further
sub-sequence by index N k l , Eq. (C.43) implies:
R 1 ·N α
k l + R 0 ≥ c · /Psi1(/Lambda1N k l , /Delta1(M( c ))) (C.48)
for all l ∈ N with lim
l→∞
N k l = ∞ .
Proposition 1 (B) implies that M( c ) ≥ B
β. More-
over, Lemma 6 and p(/Lambda1, /Delta1) = 1 −e −/Lambda1/Delta1increasing
in /Delta1imply that /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1) increases in /Delta1so that
/Psi1(/Lambda1N k l
, /Delta1(M( c ))) ≥ /Psi1(/Lambda1N k l
, /Delta1( B
β )) . In turn, applying
those facts to Eq. (C.48) yields:
R 1 ·N α
k l + R 0 ≥ c · /Psi1(/Lambda1N k l , /Delta1(
B
β )) (C.49)
Lemma 8 implies /Psi1(/Lambda1N k l
, /Delta1( B
β )) ≥ e
/Lambda1N k l
/Delta1( B
β )
−1
/Lambda1N k l
so that
Eq. (C.49) implies:
R 1 ·N α
k l + R 0 ≥ c · e
/Lambda1N k l /Delta1( B
β )
−1
/Lambda1N k l
(C.50)
Note that e x −1 =
∞ ∑
n =1
x n
n ! ≥ x ν
ν! when x ≥ 0 where ν ≡
⌈ α
1 −α + 2 ⌉ . Then, e
/Lambda1N k /Delta1( B
β )
−1
/Lambda1N k
≥ 1
ν! ·
(/Lambda1N k /Delta1( B
β )) ν
/Lambda1N k
≥ 1
ν! · /Lambda1ν−1
N k ·
/Delta1( B
β ) ν so that Eq. (C.50) implies:
R 1 ·N α
k l + R 0 ≥ c
ν!
· /Lambda1ν−1
N k l
· /Delta1(
B
β ) ν (C.51)
Moreover, since /Lambda1ν−1
N k = (
/Lambda1N k
N 1 −α
k
) (ν−1) ·N (1 −α) ·(ν−1)
k ,
Eq. (C.51) can be re-written as:
R 1 ·N α
k l + R 0 ≥ c
ν!
· (
/Lambda1N k l
N 1 −α
k l
) ν−1 ·N (1 −α) ·(ν−1)
k l · /Delta1(
B
β ) ν
(C.52)
In turn, dividing both sides by N α
k l
yields:
R 1 +
R 0
N α
k l
≥ c
ν!
· (
/Lambda1N k l
N 1 −α
k l
) ν−1 ·N (1 −α) ·(ν−1) −α
k l · /Delta1(
B
β ) ν
(C.53)
lim
l→∞
/Lambda1N k l
N 1 −α
k l
= 1
lim
l→∞
N 1 −α
k l
/Lambda1N k l
= 1
liminf
k →∞
N 1 −α
k
/Lambda1N k
> 0 where the second
equality follows from the further sub-sequence being con-
structed to converge to lim inf
k →∞
N 1 −α
k
/Lambda1N k
, and the strict inequal-
ity follows from lim inf
k →∞
N 1 −α
k
/Lambda1N k
< ∞ . Moreover, recall that
ν ≡ ⌈ α
1 −α + 2 ⌉ so that (1 − α) · (ν −1) ≥ (1 − α) · ( α
1 −α +
1) = 1 . In turn, (1 − α) · (ν −1) − α ≥ 1 − α > 0 so that
lim
l→∞
N (1 −α) ·(ν−1) −α
k l
= ∞ because lim
l→∞
N k l = ∞ . Then, since
lim
l→∞
/Lambda1N k l
N 1 −α
k l
> 0 and lim
l→∞
N (1 −α) ·(ν−1) −α
k l
= ∞ , taking l → ∞ on
both sides of Eq. (C.53) implies R 1 = ∞ , which generates
the desired contradiction. R 1 = ∞ is a contradiction be-
cause R 1 is a ﬁnite parameter of our model. □
Lemma 14 . Bounded Adoption Eventually Implies Uniformly
Bounded Adoption
If the adoption level, π∗N, is bounded as N → ∞ (i.e.,
lim sup
N→∞
π∗N < ∞ ) , then the adoption level is bounded uni-
formly for all N (i.e., sup
N∈ N
π∗N < ∞ ) .
Proof . Let L ≡ lim sup
N→∞
π∗N < ∞ . Then, by deﬁnition,
there exists N ε < ∞ such that sup
N ∈ N : N ≥N ε
π∗N ≤ L + ε < ∞
364

===== PAGE 19 =====

F.J. Hinzen, K. John and F. Saleh Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 347–369
where ε > 0 and ε < ∞ . Additionally, note that
π∗ ∈ [0 , 1] so that sup
N ∈ N : N ≤N ε
π∗N ≤ N ε . Thus, sup
N∈ N
π∗N ≤
max { sup
N ∈ N : N ≤N ε
π∗N, sup
N ∈ N : N ≥N ε
π∗N} ≤ max { N ε , L + ε} < ∞ ,
thereby completing the proof. □
C3. Proofs for Section 4
Proof of Proposition 6. . Lemma 14 yields that lim sup
N→∞
π∗N <
∞ ⇒ sup
N∈ N
π∗N < ∞ , so it suﬃces to show lim sup
N→∞
π∗N < ∞ .
We establish that result by contradiction. In particular, we
assume lim sup
N→∞
π∗N = ∞ and demonstrate that this yields
a contradiction, thereby establishing lim sup
N→∞
π∗N < ∞ and,
via Lemma 14 , also sup
N∈ N
π∗N < ∞ .
Lemma 12 and Proposition 1 (C) collectively imply that
there exists an N such that for all N > N , the following
equation holds:
R 1 ·
(
c ∗ −c
c −c
)α
·N α + R 0 = c ∗/Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M(c ∗))) +
N −1
c −c
×c 2
∗ −c 2
2/Lambda1 (C.54)
which implies:
R 1 ·
(
c ∗ −c
c −c
)α
·N α + R 0 ≥ N −1
c −c
× c 2
∗ −c 2
2/Lambda1(C.55)
for N > N . Then, using π∗ = c ∗−c
c −c , implies:
R 1 · (π∗N) α + R 0 ≥ N −1
N
× (π∗N) × c ∗ + c
2/Lambda1(C.56)
for all N > N . Further, using c ∗ ≥ c yields:
R 1 · (π∗N) α + R 0 ≥ N −1
N
× (π∗N) × c
/Lambda1 (C.57)
Then, dividing through by (π∗N) α and isolating
(π∗N) 1 −α yields:
(π∗N) 1 −α ≤
( N
N −1
)
×
(/Lambda1
c
)
·
(
R 1 +
R 0
(π∗N) α
)
(C.58)
for all N > N . Note that there must exist a sub-sequence
starting after index N = N along which π∗N converges to
lim sup
N→∞
π∗N = ∞ . As a consequence, indexing such a sub-
sequence by N k yields:
(π∗N k ) 1 −α ≤
( N k
N k −1
)
×
(/Lambda1
c
)
·
(
R 1 +
R 0
(π∗N k ) α
)
(C.59)
for all k with lim
k →∞
N k = ∞ and lim
k →∞
π∗N k = ∞ . In turn, tak-
ing k → ∞ in Eq. (C.59) yields:
∞ = lim
k →∞
(π∗N k ) 1 −α ≤ lim
k →∞
{
( N k
N k −1
)
×
(/Lambda1
c
)
×
(
R 1 +
R 0
(π∗N k ) α
)} ≤ /Lambda1·R 1
c
(C.60)
but /Lambda1, R 1 and c are all ﬁnite model parameters, implying
that that /Lambda1R 1
c < ∞ so that Eq. (C.60) delivers a contradic-
tion and completes the proof. □
Proof of Proposition 7 . Lemma 14 yields that lim sup
N→∞
π∗N <
∞ ⇒ sup
N∈ N
π∗N < ∞ , so it suﬃces to show lim sup
N→∞
π∗N < ∞ .
We establish that result by contradiction. In particular, we
assume lim sup
N→∞
π∗N = ∞ and demonstrate that this yields
a contradiction, thereby establishing lim sup
N→∞
π∗N < ∞ and,
via Lemma 14 , also sup
N∈ N
π∗N < ∞ .
Lemma 13 and Proposition 1 (C) collectively imply that
there exists an N such that for all N > N , the following
equation holds:
R 1 ·
(
c ∗ −c
c −c
)α
·N α + R 0 = c ∗/Psi1(/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M(c ∗)))
+
N −1
c −c
× c 2
∗ −c 2
2/Lambda1N
(C.61)
Note that N−1
c −c × (c 2
∗ −c 2 ) = N−1
N × N
c −c × (c 2
∗ −c 2 ) =
N−1
N ×N × c ∗−c
c −c × (c ∗ + c ) = N−1
N × (π∗N) × (c ∗ + c ) . Then,
invoking π∗ = c ∗−c
c −c in Eq. (C.61) implies:
R 1 · (π∗N) α + R 0 = c ∗/Psi1(/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M(c ∗))) +
N −1
N
× (π∗N)
×c ∗ + c
2/Lambda1N
(C.62)
for all N > N . Moreover, since lim sup
N→∞
π∗N = ∞ , there exists
a sub-sequence indexed by N k such that:
R 1 · (π∗N k ) α + R 0 = c ∗/Psi1(/Lambda1N k , /Delta1(M(c ∗))) +
N k −1
N k
×(π∗N k ) × c ∗ + c
2/Lambda1N k
(C.63)
for all k with lim
k →∞
N k = ∞ and lim
k →∞
π∗N k = ∞ . On this sub-
sequence, either lim inf
k →∞
(π∗N k ) 1 −α
/Lambda1N k
= ∞ or lim inf
k →∞
(π∗N k ) 1 −α
/Lambda1N k
<
∞ . We subsequently consider each case separately.
Case 1: lim inf
k →∞
(π∗N k ) 1 −α
/Lambda1N k
= ∞
Equation (C.63) implies:
R 1 · (π∗N k ) α + R 0 ≥ N k −1
N k
× (π∗N k ) × c ∗ + c
2/Lambda1N k
(C.64)
Note that c ∗ ≥ c so that Eq. (C.64) implies:
R 1 · (π∗N k ) α + R 0 ≥ N k −1
N k
× (π∗N k ) × c
/Lambda1N k
(C.65)
Dividing each side in Eq. (C.66) by (π∗N) α then yields:
R 1 +
R 0
(π∗N k ) α ≥ N k −1
N k
× (π∗N k ) 1 −α × c
/Lambda1N k
(C.66)
Note that N k −1
N k × (π∗N k ) 1 −α × c
/Lambda1N k
≥ inf
k
(
N k −1
N k ×
(π∗N k ) 1 −α × c
/Lambda1N k
)
≥ inf
k
N k −1
N k ×c ×inf
k
(π∗N k ) 1 −α
/Lambda1N k
≥
c
2 ×inf
k
(π∗N k ) 1 −α
/Lambda1N k
where the last inequality uses N k ≥ 2
for all k . Note also that R 0
inf
k (π∗N k ) α ≥ R 0
(π∗N k ) α . In turn,
Eq. (C.66) implies:
R 1 +
R 0
inf
k
(π∗N k ) α ≥ c
2
×inf
k
(π∗N) 1 −α
/Lambda1N k
(C.67)
365

===== PAGE 20 =====

F.J. Hinzen, K. John and F. Saleh Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 347–369
Then, taking limits as k → ∞ implies R 1 = ∞ , which de-
livers the desired contradiction since R 1 is a ﬁnite param-
eter of our model.
Case 2: lim inf
k →∞
(π∗N k ) 1 −α
/Lambda1N k
< ∞
Equation (C.63) implies:
R 1 · (π∗N k ) α + R 0 ≥ c ∗/Psi1(/Lambda1N k , /Delta1(M(c ∗))) (C.68)
Proposition 1 (B) implies that M(c ∗) ≥ B
β for any
c ∗. Moreover, Lemma 6 and p(/Lambda1, /Delta1) = 1 −e −/Lambda1/Delta1in-
creasing in /Delta1imply that /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1) increases in /Delta1so
that /Psi1(/Lambda1N k , /Delta1(M(c ∗))) ≥ /Psi1(/Lambda1N k , /Delta1( B
β )) . In turn, applying
those facts and c ∗ ≥ c to Eq. (C.68) yields:
R 1 · (π∗N k ) α + R 0 ≥ c · /Psi1(/Lambda1N k , /Delta1(
B
β )) (C.69)
Lemma 8 implies /Psi1(/Lambda1N k , /Delta1( B
β )) ≥ e
/Lambda1N k /Delta1( B
β )
−1
/Lambda1N k
so that
Eq. (C.69) implies:
R 1 · (π∗N k ) α + R 0 ≥ c · e /Lambda1N k /Delta1( B
β ) −1
/Lambda1N k
(C.70)
Note that e x −1 =
∞ ∑
n =1
x n
n ! ≥ x ν
ν! when x ≥ 0 where ν ≡
⌈ α
1 −α + 2 ⌉ . Then, e
/Lambda1N k /Delta1( B
β )
−1
/Lambda1N k
≥ 1
ν! ·
(/Lambda1N k /Delta1( B
β )) ν
/Lambda1N k
≥ 1
ν! · /Lambda1ν−1
N k ·
/Delta1( B
β ) ν so that Eq. (C.70) implies:
R 1 · (π∗N k ) α + R 0 ≥ c
ν!
· /Lambda1ν−1
N k · /Delta1(
B
β ) ν (C.71)
Moreover, since /Lambda1ν−1
N k = (
/Lambda1N k
(π∗N k ) 1 −α ) (ν−1) ·
(π∗N k ) (1 −α) ·(ν−1) , Eq. (C.71) can be re-written as:
R 1 · (π∗N k ) α + R 0 ≥ c
ν!
· (
/Lambda1N k
(π∗N k ) 1 −α ) (ν−1)
·(π∗N k ) (1 −α) ·(ν−1) · /Delta1(
B
β ) ν (C.72)
Dividing through by (π∗N k ) α then yields:
R 1 +
R 0
(π∗N k ) α ≥ c
ν!
· (
/Lambda1N k
(π∗N k ) 1 −α ) (ν−1)
·(π∗N k ) (1 −α) ·(ν−1) −α · /Delta1(
B
β ) ν (C.73)
Note that there exists a further sub-sequence that con-
verges to lim inf
k →∞
(π∗N k ) 1 −α
/Lambda1N k
. Explicitly, indexing that fur-
ther sub-sequence by N k l , we have that lim
l→∞
(π∗N k l ) 1 −α
/Lambda1N k l
=
lim inf
k →∞
(π∗N k ) 1 −α
/Lambda1N k
due to the construction of the fur-
ther sub-sequence. Note also that lim
l→∞
N k l = ∞ and
lim
l→∞
π∗N k l = ∞ because lim
k →∞
N k = ∞ and lim
k →∞
π∗N k = ∞ .
Since Eq. (C.73) holds for all k , it also holds for all k l . More
explicitly:
R 1 +
R 0
(π∗N k l ) α ≥ c
ν!
· (
/Lambda1N k l
(π∗N k l ) 1 −α ) (ν−1)
·(π∗N k l ) (1 −α) ·(ν−1) −α · /Delta1(
B
β ) ν (C.74)
lim
l→∞
/Lambda1N k l
(π∗N k l ) 1 −α = 1
lim
l→∞
(π∗N k l ) 1 −α
/Lambda1N k l
= 1
liminf
k →∞
(π∗N k ) 1 −α
/Lambda1N k
> 0
where the second equality follows from the further sub-
sequence being constructed to converge to lim inf
k →∞
(π∗N k ) 1 −α
/Lambda1N k
,
and the strict inequality follows from lim inf
k →∞
(π∗N k ) 1 −α
/Lambda1N k
< ∞ .
Moreover, recall that ν ≡ ⌈ α
1 −α + 2 ⌉ so that (1 − α) · (ν −
1) ≥ (1 − α) · ( α
1 −α + 1) = 1 . In turn, (1 − α) · (ν −1) −
α ≥ 1 − α > 0 so that lim
l→∞
(π∗N k l ) (1 −α) ·(ν−1) −α = ∞ be-
cause lim
l→∞
π∗N k l = ∞ . Then, since lim
l→∞
/Lambda1N k l
(π∗N k l ) 1 −α > 0 and
lim
l→∞
(π∗N k l ) (1 −α) ·(ν−1) −α = ∞ , taking l → ∞ on both sides
of Eq. (C.74) implies R 1 = ∞ , which generates the desired
contradiction. R 1 = ∞ is a contradiction because R 1 is a
ﬁnite parameter of our model. □
Proof of Proposition 8. . As per the hypothesis of the result,
we restrict only the transaction rate, /Lambda1, and the network
delay function, /Delta1(M) , in establishing this result. Our result
is invariant to any given set of preference parameters in
our model.
Explicitly, we require that the transaction rate /Lambda1corre-
sponds to 150 million transactions per day. Moreover, we
require that the network delay function, /Delta1(M) , be such
that /Delta1(M) ≥ /Delta1, whereas /Delta1is given by empirical estimates
in Croman et al. (2016) .
It is useful to convert to seconds so the transaction rate,
/Lambda1, is given as follows:
/Lambda1=
150 ×10 6 transactions
day
× 1 day
24 ×60 ×60 seconds
= 1736
transactions
second
(C.75)
where we round down to the nearest integer.
Croman et al. (2016) ﬁnd that a 1 MB block possesses
a median propagation time of 15.7 s. Our network delay
function corresponds to the mean propagation time for a
single transaction. Thus, assuming that the mean exceeds
the median and that a 1 MB block has 20 0 0 transactions,
the lower bound for network delay, /Delta1, can itself be
bounded below as follows:
/Delta1≥ 15 . 7 seconds
block
× 1 block
20 0 0 transactions
(C.76)
Note that the network delay data in
Croman et al. (2016) is right-skewed, so our assumption
regarding the mean exceeding the median is consistent
with their data. Moreover, assuming 20 0 0 transactions per
block is also consistent with the publicly available data on
Bitcoin and is used in Huberman et al. (2021) .
Turning to Proposition 8 (A), Eq. (5) implies:
p ≡ P (F ork ) ≥ 1 −e −/Lambda1/Delta1> 0 . 99 (C.77)
which establishes the ﬁrst part of Proposition 8 (A). For the
second part of Proposition 8 (A), note that Lemma 1 im-
plies that the blockchain is in a fork with probability
1 − (1 − p) b , where p is the fork  probability given by
Eq. (C.77) , and b is the number of blocks on which the
network must agree to regain consensus. Note that b ≥ 1
366

===== PAGE 21 =====

F.J. Hinzen, K. John and F. Saleh Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 347–369
by deﬁnition so that 1 − (1 − p) b ≥ 1 − (1 − p) 1 = p > 0 . 99
thereby completing the proof of Proposition 8 (A).
Turning to Proposition 8 (B), recall that the expected
wait time for any User i is bounded below by the con-
sensus wait time, and the consensus wait time is identical
across users. More explicitly, the following equation holds:
E [ W (f i , f −i )] ≥ τ(/Lambda1, /Delta1(M)) (C.78)
Then, since the consensus wait time increases in
network delay (see Lemma 6 ), /Delta1(M) ≥ /Delta1applied to
Eq. (C.78) yields:
E [ W (f i , f −i )] ≥ τ(/Lambda1, /Delta1) (C.79)
In turn, computing τ directly yields (see Appendix Ap-
pendix B ):
E [ W (f i , f −i )] ≥ τ(/Lambda1, /Delta1) ≫ 1 year (C.80)
which thereby completes the proof.
As a technical aside, the last computation requires a
value for b, and we use b = 6 . Moreover, for ease of com-
putation, we use 0.99 as the fork probability even though
p > 0 . 99 . Note that Lemma 6 implies that the computa-
tion for a fork probability of 0.99 will produce a lower
consensus wait time than that for p > 0 . 99 so that our
computations can be seen as a lower bound. Finally, per
Appendix Appendix B , the expected number of blocks to
regain consensus, ˜ τ, does not depend upon the block rate
independently of the transaction rate. In turn, the over-
all consensus wait time decreases in the block rate for a
given transaction rate and thus the consensus wait time is
lowest when the block rate is highest. Since the block rate
and block size are inversely proportional for a given trans-
action rate, the consensus wait time is lowest when the
block size is minimized, so we set block sizes to unity for
our computation. □
C4. Proofs for Sections 3 and 5
Proof of Proposition 2. . For all N, the following holds true:
π∗ ≤
sup
N∈ N
π∗N
N
(C.81)
In turn, invoking sup
N∈ N
π∗N < ∞ from Proposition 6 im-
plies:
lim sup
N→∞
π∗ ≤ lim sup
N→∞
sup
N∈ N
π∗N
N
= lim
N→∞
sup
N∈ N
π∗N
N
= 0
(C.82)
Finally, π∗ ∈ [0 , 1] for all N implies lim inf
N→∞
π∗ ≥ 0 so
that Eq. (C.82) implies lim
N→∞
π∗ = 0 , thereby completing the
proof. □
Proof of Proposition 3. . For all N, the following holds true:
π∗ ≤
sup
N∈ N
π∗N
N
(C.83)
In turn, invoking sup
N∈ N
π∗N < ∞ from Proposition 7 im-
plies:
lim sup
N→∞
π∗ ≤ lim sup
N→∞
sup
N∈ N
π∗N
N
= lim
N→∞
sup
N∈ N
π∗N
N
= 0
(C.84)
Finally, π∗ ∈ [0 , 1] for all N implies lim inf
N→∞
π∗ ≥ 0 so
that Eq. (C.84) implies lim
N→∞
π∗ = 0 , thereby completing the
proof. □
Proof of Proposition 4. . Lemma 8 yields:
τ(/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M)) ≥ e /Lambda1N /Delta1(M) −1
/Lambda1N
(C.85)
Note that e x −1 =
∑  ∞
n =1
x n
n ! so that e x −1 ≥ x 2
2 + x when
x ≥ 0 . In turn, Eq. (C.85) implies:
τ(/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M)) ≥ /Lambda1N /Delta1(M) 2
2
+ /Delta1(M) (C.86)
From Proposition 1 v, M ≥ B
β > 1 so that /Delta1(M) ≥
/Delta1( B
β ) > /Delta1(1) = 0 . As a consequence, Eq. (C.86) further im-
plies:
τ(/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M)) ≥
/Lambda1N /Delta1( B
β ) 2
2
+ /Delta1(
B
β ) (C.87)
so that taking N → ∞ on both sides implies
lim
N→∞
τ(/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M)) = ∞ as desired. □
Proof of Proposition 5. . We provide a constructive proof. In
particular, we explicitly specify /Lambda1N such that there exists
a full adoption equilibrium for all suﬃciently large N (i.e.,
there exists N > 0 such that π∗ = 1 for all N > N and thus
lim
N→∞
π∗ = 1 > 0 ) and the mining network size diverges (i.e.,
lim
N→∞
M = ∞ ).
We specify the transaction rate as follows: /Lambda1N = N−1
2 .
Note that /Delta1(M) = 0 implies /Psi1(/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M)) = 1
/Lambda1N . Then, via
Proposition 1 (D), a full adoption equilibrium exists if:
R 1 ·N α + R 0 ≥ c
/Lambda1N
+ (N −1)
c + c
2/Lambda1N
=
2 ·c
N −1
+ c + c
(C.88)
Note that:
lim
N→∞
(
R 1 ·N α +R 0 − 2 ·c
N −1
−c −c
)
= ∞ (C.89)
which implies that Eq. (C.88) is satisﬁed for all N suﬃ-
ciently large. In turn, via Proposition 1 (C), there exists an
N > 0 such that π∗ = 1 for all N > N as desired.
To complete the proof, we must demonstrate only that
lim
N→∞
M = ∞ . Proposition 1 (B) yields:
M = M(c ∗) =
B
β +
N(N −1)
6 β/Lambda1N
(c ∗ −c ) · (c 2
∗ + c ∗c −2 c 2 )
( c −c ) 2
(C.90)
Then, using /Lambda1N = N−1
2 and π∗ = 1 ⇔ c ∗ = c for N > N ,
Eq. (C.90) becomes:
M = M( c ) =
B
β +
N
3 β · c 2 + c c −2 c 2
c −c
(C.91)
367

===== PAGE 22 =====

F.J. Hinzen, K. John and F. Saleh Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 347–369
for N > N . Finally, taking N → ∞ in Eq. (C.91) yields:
lim
N→∞
M = lim
N→∞
(B
β +
N
3 β · c 2 + c c −2 c 2
c −c
)
= ∞ (C.92)
which completes the proof. □
Proof of Proposition 9. . Either R 1 ·N α + R 0 ≥ c ·
/Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1C (M( c ))) + (N −1) × c + c
2/Lambda1or R 1 ·N α + R 0 <
c · /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1C (M( c ))) + (N −1) × c + c
2/Lambda1. We proceed by prov-
ing our result for each case in turn.
Case 1: R 1 ·N α + R 0 ≥ c · /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1C (M( c ))) + (N −1) ×
c + c
2/Lambda1
In this case, Proposition 1 (D) implies that πC
∗ = 1 so
that πC
∗ ≥ πD
∗ follows trivially from πD
∗ ∈ [0 , 1] since πD
∗ ≤
1 = πC
∗ .
Case 2: R 1 ·N α + R 0 < c · /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1C (M( c ))) + (N −1) ×
c + c
2/Lambda1
Note that Proposition 1 implies that πC
∗ < 1 in this case.
Moreover, note that Lemma 9 implies that:
c · /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1C (M( c ))) + (N −1) × c + c
2/Lambda1
≤ c · /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1D (M( c ))) + (N −1) × c + c
2/Lambda1 (C.93)
so that:
R 1 ·N α +R 0 < c · /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1D (M( c ))) + (N −1) × c + c
2/Lambda1
(C.94)
and thus Proposition 1 also implies that πD
∗ < 1 . More ex-
plicitly, Proposition 1 (C) implies that πD
∗ = c D ∗ −c
c −c where c D
∗
solves the following equation:
R 1 · (
c D
∗ −c
c −c
) α ·N α + R 0 = c D
∗ /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1D (M(c D
∗ )))
+
N −1
c −c
× (c D
∗ ) 2 −c 2
2/Lambda1(C.95)
Lemma 9 implies:
c D
∗ /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1D (M(c D
∗ ))) +
N −1
c −c
× (c D
∗ ) 2 −c 2
2/Lambda1
> c D
∗ /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1C (M(c D
∗ ))) +
N −1
c −c
× (c D
∗ ) 2 −c 2
2/Lambda1(C.96)
so that Eq. (C.95) becomes:
R 1 ·
(
c D
∗ −c
c −c
)α
·N α + R 0 > c D
∗ /Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1C (M(c D
∗ ))) +
N −1
c −c
×(c D
∗ ) 2 −c 2
2/Lambda1 (C.97)
In turn, we deﬁne:
/Xi1(x ) ≡ R 1 · (
x −c
c −c
) α ·N α + R 0 −
(
c ∗/Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1C (M(x )))
+
N −1
c −c
× x 2 −c 2
2/Lambda1
)
(C.98)
so that Eq. (C.97) is equivalent to /Xi1(c D
∗ ) > 0 . Note
that the hypothesis of Case 2 (i.e., R 1 ·N α + R 0 < c ·
/Psi1(/Lambda1, /Delta1C (M( c ))) + (N −1) × c + c
2/Lambda1) is equivalent to /Xi1( c ) <
0 . Then, /Xi1(c D
∗ ) > 0 , /Xi1( c ) < 0 and /Xi1being continuous im-
plies there exists an x ∗ ∈ (c D
∗ , c ) such that /Xi1(x ∗) = 0 . Fur-
ther, Proposition 1 (C) establishes that /Xi1(x ∗) = 0 implies
c C
∗ = x ∗ > c D
∗ where the associated adoption cut-off is given
by πC
∗ = c C ∗−c
c −c . Finally, πk
∗ = c k ∗−c
c −c for k ∈ { C, D } implies πC
∗ >
πD
∗ , thereby completing the proof. □
Proof of Proposition 10. . We provide a constructive proof.
In particular, we explicitly specify /Lambda1N such that there ex-
ists a full adoption equilibrium for all suﬃciently large N
(i.e., there exists N > 0 such that π∗ = 1 for all N > N and
thus lim
N→∞
π∗ = 1 > 0 ) and the network size diverges (i.e.,
lim
N→∞
M = ∞ ).
Recall that /Psi1(/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M)) = 1
/Lambda1N + τ(p F (/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M)) ,
/Lambda1N ) where τ(p F (/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M)) , /Lambda1N ) is deﬁned in
Appendix Appendix B and discussed after the proof of
Lemma 7 . Note that we are not using Bitcoin’s fork proba-
bility function and rather using a fork probability function
as given by the hypothesis of this proposition (i.e., p F such
that sup
/Lambda1, /Delta1
p F (/Lambda1, /Delta1) < 1 ). Then, via Proposition 1 (D), a full
adoption equilibrium exists if:
R 1 ·N α + R 0 ≥ c ×
( 1
/Lambda1N
+ τ(p F (/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M)) , /Lambda1N )
)
+(N −1)
c + c
2/Lambda1N
(C.99)
We select the transaction rate to vary according to
/Lambda1N = N−1
2 , which implies that Eq. (C.99) becomes:
R 1 ·N α + R 0 ≥ c ×
( 1
/Lambda1N
+ τ(p F (/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M)) , /Lambda1N )
)
+ c + c
(C.100)
Then, Lemma 7 yields that lim
N→∞
τ(p F (/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M)) ,
/Lambda1N ) = 0 so that:
lim
N→∞
(
R 1 ·N α + R 0 −c ×
( 1
/Lambda1N
+ τ(p F (/Lambda1N , /Delta1(M)) , /Lambda1N )
)
−c −c
)
= ∞ (C.101)
which implies that Eq. (C.99) is satisﬁed for all N suﬃ-
ciently large. In turn, via Proposition 1 (C), there exists an
N > 0 such that π∗ = 1 for all N > N as desired.
To complete the proof, we must demonstrate only that
lim
N→∞
M = ∞ . Proposition 1 (B) yields:
M = M(c ∗) =
B
β +
N(N −1)
6 β/Lambda1N
(c ∗ −c ) · (c 2
∗ + c ∗c −2 c 2 )
( c −c ) 2
(C.102)
Then, using /Lambda1N = N−1
2 and π∗ = 1 ⇔ c ∗ = c for N > N ,
Eq. (C.102) becomes:
M = M( c ) =
B
β +
N
3 β · c 2 + c c −2 c 2
c −c
(C.103)
for N > N . Finally, taking N → ∞ in Eq. (C.103) yields:
lim
N→∞
M = lim
N→∞
(B
β +
N
3 β · c 2 + c c −2 c 2
c −c
)
= ∞ (C.104)
which completes the proof. □
368

===== PAGE 23 =====

F.J. Hinzen, K. John and F. Saleh Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 347–369
References
Alsabah, H. , Capponi, A. , 2021. Pitfalls of Bitcoin’s Proof-of-Work: R&D
Arms Race and Mining Centralization. Working Paper .
Biais, B. , Bisiére, C. , Bouvard, M. , Casamatta, C. , 2019. The blockchain folk
theorem. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (5), 1662–1715 .
Biais, B. , Bisiére, C. , Bouvard, M. , Casamatta, C. , Menkveld, A.J. , 2020. Equi-
librium Bitcoin Pricing. Working Paper .
Castro, M. , Liskov, B. , et al. , 1999. Practical byzantine fault tolerance. In:
OSDI, vol. 99, pp. 173–186 .
Chiu, J. , Koeppl, T.V. , 2020. The Economics of Cryptocurrencies - Bitcoin
and Beyond. Working Paper .
Chung, F. , Lu, L. , 2002. The average distances in random graphs with given
expected degrees. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 99 (25), 15879–15882 .
Cong, L.W. , He, Z. , Li, J. , 2021. Decentralized mining in centralized pools.
Rev. Financ. Stud. 34, 1191–1235 .
Cong, L.W. , Li, Y. , Wang, N. , 2021. Tokenomics: dynamic adoption and val-
uation. Rev. Financ. Stud. 34, 1105–1155 .
Croman, K. , Decker, C. , Eyal, I. , Gencer, A.E. , Juels, A. , Kosba, A. , Miller, A. ,
Saxena, P. , Shi, E. , Sirer, E.G. , et al. , 2016. On scaling decentralized
blockchains. In: International Conference on Financial Cryptography
and Data Security. Springer, pp. 106–125 .
Decker, C. , Wattenhofer, R. , 2013. Information propagation in the bitcoin
network. In: IEEE P2P 2013 Proceedings .
Easley, D., O’Hara, M., Basu, S., 2019. From mining to markets: the evo-
lution of bitcoin transaction fees. J. Financ. Econ. 134 (1), 91–109.
doi: 10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2019.03.004 .
Eyal, I., Gencer, A.E., Sirer, E.G., van Renesse, R., 2015. Bitcoin-NG: a scal-
able blockchain protocol. CoRR. abs/1510.02037 .
Ferreira, D. , Li, J. , Nikolowa, R. , 2020. Corporate Capture of Blockchain
Governance. Working Paper .
Foley, S. , Karlsen, J.R. , Putnins, T.J. , 2019. Sex, drugs, and bitcoin: how
much illegal activity is ﬁnanced through cryptocurrencies? Rev. Fi-
nanc. Stud. 32 (5), 1798–1853 .
Griﬃn, J.M. , Shams, A. , 2020. Is bitcoin really un-tethered? J. Finance 75,
1913–1964 .
Huberman, G., Leshno, J.D., Moallemi, C., 2021. Monopoly without a mo-
nopolist: an economic analysis of the bitcoin payment system. Rev.
Econ. Stud. doi: 10.1093/restud/rdab014 .
Iyengar, G. , Saleh, F. , Sethuraman, J. , Wang, W. , 2022. Economics of Per-
missioned Blockchain Adoption. Working Paper. Columbia University .
John, K. , O’Hara, M. , Saleh, F. , 2022. Bitcoin and beyond. Annu. Rev. Financ.
Econ. 14 .
Lehar, A. , Parlour, C. , 2020. Miner Collusion and the Bitcoin Protocol.
Working Paper .
Makarov, I. , Schoar, A. , 2020. Trading and arbitrage in cryptocurrency mar-
kets. J. Financ. Econ. 135 (2), 293–319 .
Nakamoto, S., 2008. Bitcoin: a peer-to-peer electronic cash system. https:
//bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf .
Narayanan, A. , Bonneau, J. , Felten, E. , Miller, A. , Goldfeder, S. , 2016. Bitcoin
and Cryptocurrency Technologies. Princeton University Press .
Pagnotta, E. , 2022. Bitcoin as decentralized money: prices, mining re-
wards, and network security. Rev. Financ. Stud. . Forthcoming
Pass, R. , Shi, E. , 2018. Thunderella: blockchains with optimistic instant
conﬁrmation. In: Annual International Conference on the Theory and
Applications of Cryptographic Techniques. Springer, pp. 3–33 .
Raskin, M. , Saleh, F. , Yermack, D. , 2019. How Do Private Digital Currencies
Affect Government Policy? NBER Working Paper .
Riordan, O. , Wormald, N. , 2010. The diameter of sparse random graphs.
Comb. Probab. Comput. 19, 835–926 .
Saleh, F. , 2019. Volatility and Welfare in a Crypto Economy. Working Pa-
per .
Saleh, F. , 2021. Blockchain without waste: proof-of-stake. Rev. Financ.
Stud. 34, 1156–1190 .
de Vries, A. , 2018. Bitcoin’s growing energy problem. Joule 2 (5), 801–805 .
Yermack, D. , 2015. Is bitcoin a real currency? An economic appraisal.
Handb. Digit. Currency 31–43 .
Zhou, Q. , Huang, H. , Zheng, Z. , Bian, J. , 2020. Solutions to scalability of
blockchain: a survey. IEEE Access 8, 16440–16455 .
369