

===== PAGE 1 =====

Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 972–991
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Financial Economics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec
Token-based platform ﬁnance /p82
Lin William Cong a , Ye Li b , ∗, Neng Wang c
a Cornell University Johnson Graduate School of Management, United States
b The Ohio State University Fisher College of Business, 2100 Neil Avenue, Columbus OH 43210, United States
c Columbia Business School, ABFER, and NBER, United States
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 8 September 2020
Revised 4 May 2021
Accepted 1 June 2021
Available online 10 October 2021
JEL classiﬁcation:
E41
E42
E51
G1
G23
G31
G32
G35
Keywords:
Blockchain
Cryptocurrency
Dynamic corporate ﬁnancing
Durable goods
Gig economy
Optimal token supply
Time inconsistency
Token/coin offering
a b s t r a c t
We develop a dynamic model of a platform economy where tokens serve as a means of
payment among platform users and are issued to ﬁnance investment in platform produc-
tivity. Tokens are optimally rewarded to platform owners when token supply (normalized
by productivity) is low and burnt to boost franchise value when the normalized supply is
high. Although token price is determined in a liquid market, the platform’s ﬁnancial con-
straint generates an endogenous token issuance cost that causes underinvestment through
the conﬂict of interest between insiders (owners) and outsiders (users). Blockchain tech-
nology mitigates underinvestment by addressing the owners’ time inconsistency problem.
©2 0 2 1 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
/p82 We thank the anonymous referee, Patrick Bolton, Markus Brunnermeier, Peter DeMarzo, Darrell Duﬃe, Daniel Ferreira (discussant), Sebastian Gryglewicz
(discussant), Zhiguo He, Wei Jiang, Andrew Karolyi, Maureen O’Hara, Dmitry Orlov (discussant), Emiliano S. Pagnotta (discussant), Christine Parlour, Uday
Rajan, Jean-Charles Rochet, Fahad Saleh (discussant), David Skeie (discussant), Michael Sockin (discussant), René Stulz, Pierre-Olivier Weill, Ying Wu, Miao
Zhang, and conference/seminar participants at ABFER/CEPR/CUHK Financial Economics Symposium, AFA 2020, Carnegie Mellon University Tepper School
of Business, Central Bank Research Association 2019, CEPR ESSFM Gerzensee, Chicago Financial Institutions Conference, City University of Hong Kong,
Cleveland Fed/OFR Financial Stability Conference, Cornell University, Econometric Society North America 2019, Erasmus Liquidity Conference, International
Monetary Fund, Luohan Academy Digital Economy Conference, Maastricht University, Macro Finance Society 14th Meeting, Midwest Finance Association
2019, Online Digital-Economy Seminar (Hong Kong Baptist U, Monash University, National Taiwan U, Renmin U), SFS Cavalcade North America 2020, Ohio
State University (Finance), Stevens Institute of Technology, Tokenomics International Conference on Blockchain Economics, Rome Junior Finance Conference,
Security and Protocols, University of British Columbia (Econ), University of Calgary Haskayne School of Business, University of Florida, USI Lugano, and
University of Washington Bothell (Econ) for helpful comments. We also thank Desheng Ma and Yu Wang for their research assistance. Will is grateful for
the ﬁnancial support from the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation . Ye is grateful for the ﬁnancial support from Studienzentrum Gerzensee. The contents
of this publication are solely the responsibility of the authors. The paper subsumes results from previous drafts titled “Token-Based Corporate Finance” and
“Tokenomics and Platform Finance.”
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: will.cong@cornell.edu (L.W. Cong), li.8935@osu.edu (Y. Li), neng.wang@columbia.edu (N. Wang).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2021.10.002
0304-405X/© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

===== PAGE 2 =====

L.W. Cong, Y. Li and N. Wang Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 972–991
1. Introduction
Digital platforms are reshaping the organization of eco-
nomic activities. Traditional platforms rely heavily on pay-
ment innovations to stimulate economic exchanges among
users. Recently, blockchain technology offers alternative
solutions. A new generation of digital platforms introduce
crypto tokens as local currencies and allow the use of
smart contracts to facilitate transactions among users, as
well as the ﬁnancing of ongoing platform development.
We develop a dynamic model of a digital platform to
analyze the equilibrium dynamics of token-based com-
munities. In our model, transactions on the platform are
settled with native tokens. Users demand tokens as a
means of payment, and their holdings are exposed to
the ﬂuctuation of token price. The entrepreneur (rep-
resenting platform owners) manages token issuance by
solving a dynamic problem of token-based payout and
token-ﬁnanced investment in platform productivity. The
token market-clearing condition determines the evolution
of the token price. The ratio of token supply to platform
productivity (“normalized token supply”) is the key state
variable. When it is high (i.e., the system is “inﬂated”), the
platform cuts back investment and refrains from payout.
To reduce token supply and boost token price, the plat-
form may ﬁnd it optimal to buy back tokens, but doing so
requires costly external funds. 1 The ﬁnancing cost of token
buyback is the key friction that causes underinvestment in
productivity. Our analysis applies to both traditional and
blockchain-based platforms.
Our model delivers several unique insights on the
economics of tokens and platforms. First, tokens are akin
to durable goods but defy Coase’s conjecture ( Coase, 1972 ).
While the marginal cost of producing digital tokens is
zero, the entrepreneur refrains from over-supply, and the
equilibrium token price is positive. In contrast to the
stationary demand in durable goods models (e.g., Stokey,
1981; Bulow, 1982 ), token demand grows endogenously as
the platform invests in its productivity. 2 Under a growing
token demand, the entrepreneur optimally spreads out
token payouts over time, trading off between milking the
system now or in the future. The entrepreneur balances
the growth of token supply with productivity. Speciﬁcally,
the productivity-normalized token supply is endogenously
bounded.
Second, underinvestment arises from the conﬂict of in-
terest between the entrepreneur and platform users. When
tokens are issued to ﬁnance investment, token supply in-
creases but the investment outcome is random. If produc-
tivity improves, both the entrepreneur and users beneﬁt;
otherwise, the users are free to reduce token holdings or
even abandon the platform, while the entrepreneur, now
facing an inﬂated system, may have to raise costly external
1 Buying back and burning tokens means sending them to a public
“eater address” from which they can never be retrieved because the ad-
dress key is unobtainable. Practitioners often burn tokens to boost token
price and reward token holders (e.g., Binance and Ripple).
2 The platform network effect—the positive externality of one user’s
adoption on other users—ampliﬁes the demand growth in a mechanism
that is reminiscent of the knowledge spillover effect in Romer (1986) .
funds to buy back tokens. Such asymmetry dampens the
entrepreneur’s incentive to invest. The underinvestment in
turn reduces user welfare, the equilibrium token price, and
eventually, the entrepreneur’s value from token payouts.
The root of the underinvestment problem is the en-
trepreneur’s time inconsistency. If the entrepreneur is able
to commit against underinvestment, the users would de-
mand more tokens, which then increases the token price
and the value of entrepreneur’s token payouts. However,
time inconsistency arises as the predetermined level of
investment (optimal ex ante) can be deemed suboptimal
ex post as the conﬂict of interest arises between the
entrepreneur and platform users. Blockchain technology
enables commitment to predetermined rules of investment
and can thus add value by addressing time inconsistency.
Our paper is among the ﬁrst to show the value of commit-
ment brought by blockchains. 3 That said, we recognize that
in practice, blockchain commitment is far from perfect, and
that is why it is important to consider both predetermined
and discretionary token supply (our baseline case). 4
We analyze tokens as monetary assets that facilitate
transactions in a fully dynamic setting rather than tokens
as dividend-paying assets and their difference from tradi-
tional securities (e.g., Gryglewicz et al., 2020 ). Our paper
builds upon Cong et al. (2021) (henceforth CLW). While
CLW assume a ﬁxed token supply (standard in the litera-
ture), in this paper, we analyze the optimal token supply
and explore new questions on the dynamics of platform
investment and ﬁnancing, the conﬂict of interest between
the entrepreneur and users, and the role of blockchain
technology in platform economics.
Next, we further elaborate on our model setup and
mechanisms. Users hold tokens as a means of payment
on the platform, enjoying convenience yield that increases
in platform productivity. Intuitively, the more productive
a platform is, the more activities (and transactions) it
supports. To capture the network effect, a distinguishing
feature of platform businesses, we allow the convenience
yield to depend on the number of users. The user base
evolves endogenously for two reasons. First, the stochastic
growth of productivity directly affects adoption. Second,
users’ expectations of future token price varies over time.
An intertemporal complementarity ampliﬁes the effects
of productivity growth on user-base dynamics —w h e n
potential users expect productivity growth and more users
to join in future, they expect token price to appreciate and
thus have a stronger incentive to adopt now.
3 In a dynamic system where a large player interacts with a group
of small players, the small players respond to the large player’s discre-
tionary action. As a result, the large player’s decision-making environ-
ment changes in response to her own action. The large player may ob-
tain a higher value by forgoing discretion and committing to a plan. This
mechanism lies behind studies on the commitment of monetary and ﬁscal
policies (e.g., Fischer, 1980; Kydland and Prescott, 1980; Lucas and Stokey,
1983; Barro and Gordon, 1983; Ljungqvist and Sargent, 2018 ) and, more
recently, optimal corporate capital structure (e.g., DeMarzo and He, 2021 ).
4 While some platforms restrict the maximum of token supply, such
caps are typically large, leaving the gradual release of token reserves un-
der the discretion of platform designers. Moreover, platform designers are
often entitled to a signiﬁcant fraction of total allocation, through which
they can inﬂuence token supply despite various vesting schemes. Ap-
pendix A illustrates the discretionary allocation with examples.
973

===== PAGE 3 =====

L.W. Cong, Y. Li and N. Wang Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 972–991
The platform’s investment in productivity is ﬁnanced by
token issuances. Therefore, tokens not only enable users to
transact with one another, but they also serve as ﬁnancing
instruments. The platform can increase token supply and
pay tokens to a pool of contributors for their efforts and
resources that improve productivity. 5 Because the contrib-
utors sell tokens to users who value the convenience yield
and thus are the natural buyers, the amount of resources
the platform can raise by issuing tokens depends on the
token price. Token price is determined endogenously by
the users’ token demand and the platform’s supply.
The entrepreneur’s value is the present value of the
tokens she is paid net the costs of token buybacks. In
the Markov equilibrium, the entrepreneur’s value is a
function of the current platform productivity and token
supply, which are the two state variables. The marginal
value of productivity is positive, capturing the equilibrium
dynamics of users’ adoption and the valuation of the
tokens. The marginal value of token supply is negative
due to the downward pressure of supply on token price
and the entrepreneur’s token payout. In order to protect
the continuation value (i.e., the present value of future
token payout), the entrepreneur may even ﬁnd it optimal
to buy back tokens (through external ﬁnancing) and burn
them out of circulation. 6 In equilibrium, the entrepreneur
receives token payout when token supply is low relative
to platform productivity and buys back tokens when token
supply is relatively high. Fig. 1 provides a summary of the
circulation of tokens in our dynamic platform economy. 7
A key friction in our model is that when buying back
tokens, the entrepreneur has to raise costly external funds.
While token buybacks occur occasionally, the associated
ﬁnancing cost propagates into a dynamic token issuance
cost in every state of the world because every time
more tokens are issued, the entrepreneur’s expectation
of costly future buyback changes accordingly. Speciﬁcally,
the entrepreneur’s cost of issuing one more token (i.e.,
the marginal decline of continuation value) is larger than
the market price of tokens (i.e., the users’ valuation of
tokens). This wedge causes the platform to under-invest in
productivity.
In our model, tokens are perfectly liquid. For example,
newly issued tokens are not subject to discounts due to
informational asymmetry. They are simply valued by the
marginal user’s indifference condition. Despite the perfect
liquidity, tokens are not immune to ﬁnancial frictions. The
token issuance cost emerges because the entrepreneur’s
5 Our focus on decentralized contributions is consistent with the vi-
sion of major token-based platforms that once the platform launches, the
founding entrepreneurs’ contributions tend to be limited relative to the
decentralized contributors’, such as KIN, a blockchain-based social net-
work, and TON, a payment network.
6 Burning tokens means sending them to a public “eater address” from
which they can never be retrieved because the address key is unobtain-
able. Practitioners often burn tokens to boost token price and reward to-
ken holders (e.g., Binance and Ripple). Some also use Proof-of-Burn as
an environmentally friendly alternative to Proof-of-Work to generate con-
sensus (e.g., Counterparty (XCP) blockchain), or destroy unsold tokens or
coins after an ICO or seasoned token issuances for fair play (e.g., Neblio’s
burning of NEBL tokens).
7 We thank our discussant Sebastian Gryglewicz for sharing this ﬁgure
with us in his discussion slides.
optimal buyback relies on costly external funds. In other
words, the optimal strategy of token management trans-
mits the traditional costs of external ﬁnancing into an
endogenous cost of token issuance.
The dynamic token issuance cost implies a conﬂict of
interest between the entrepreneur and users. Productivity
enhancement paid with tokens beneﬁts users via a higher
convenience yield. But more tokens in circulation implies
a higher likelihood of costly token buyback in the future.
Therefore, while the entrepreneur bears the costs of future
token buyback, the beneﬁts of token-ﬁnanced investment
are shared with users. Admittedly, part of these beneﬁts
ﬂow to the entrepreneur through a higher token price (and
higher value of token payout), but the entrepreneur can-
not seize all surplus from users. Users are heterogeneous
in deriving convenience yield from tokens, so only the
marginal user breaks even while those who derive more
convenience yield enjoy a positive surplus. 8 Token over-
hang, which is underinvestment due to the surplus leakage
to users, is a fundamental feature of token-based ﬁnancing.
After characterizing the optimal token-management
strategy (i.e., investment, payout, and buyback), we analyze
the value of introducing blockchain technology in our set-
ting. Blockchains distinguish themselves from traditional
technologies in several aspects: immutable record keeping
due to their time-stamping and linked-list data structure,
smart contracting for automating and ensuring execution,
and distributed design for easier monitoring and decentral-
ized governance. These features enable the commitment
of predetermined token-supply rules that, we show, are
valuable in addressing the underinvestment problem.
Speciﬁcally, motivated by Ethereum, we consider a
constant rate of token issuances that ﬁnance investment.
We ﬁnd that commitment mitigates the underinvestment
problem by severing the state-by-state linkage between
investment and the token issuance cost. While the in-
creased amount of tokens issued for investment results
in more frequent costly token buyback, the entrepreneur’s
value is higher than the case with discretionary token
supply, because the token price is higher under faster
trajectories of productivity and user-base growth. Previous
studies of tokens assume predetermined rules of supply.
In contrast, our analysis starts from the fully discretionary
supply of tokens. By comparing the discretionary case with
the predetermined case, we are able to identify the value
added by commitment and to partly explain the popularity
of blockchain technology among the platform businesses.
Finally, our model also has implications for the design
of stablecoins. Different from the approaches based on col-
lateralization, the entrepreneur in our setting supports the
franchise value by occasionally buying back tokens out of
circulation. The buyback happens when the token supply
is high relative to the platform productivity —p r e c i s e l y
at the moment that token price is low but the marginal
value of reducing token supply is high. The resulting token
8 The intuition is related to the surplus that a monopolistic producer
forgoes to consumers when price discrimination is impossible. Here to-
kens are traded at a prevailing price among competitive users, so the
entrepreneur cannot extract more value from users who derive a higher
convenience yield from tokens.
974

===== PAGE 4 =====

L.W. Cong, Y. Li and N. Wang Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 972–991
Fig. 1. Token ecosystem. The black and gray arrows represent token supply and demand, respectively. We thank our discussant Sebastian Gryglewicz for
sharing with us this ﬁgure in his discussion slides.
supply dynamics moderate the token price ﬂuctuations.
Therefore, for platforms with endogenous productivity
growth, their tokens are inherently stable.
Overall, our model provides insight on the equilibrium
dynamics of token-based communities and provides a
guiding framework for practitioners. The various token
offering schemes observed in practice can be viewed as
special (suboptimal) cases. In Appendix A, we illustrate the
institutional background and provide real-life examples.
The paper that is most related to ours is
Gryglewicz et al. (2020) , who also study endogenous
platform productivity but focus on the founders’ efforts,
rather than decentralized contributors’ efforts and re-
sources. Mayer (2020) introduces speculators and studies
the conﬂict of interest among various token holders.
Our paper differs in our focus on tokens as a means of
payment and on a different stage of platform life-cycle.
Gryglewicz et al. (2020) model uncertainty in the exoge-
nous arrival of platform launching and a constant token
price post-launch. We study a post-launch platform with
uncertainty from Brownian productivity shocks, and model
the endogenous ﬂuctuation of token price. Finally, while
they consider a ﬁxed token supply, we characterize the
optimal state-contingent supply and highlight the value of
commitment brought by blockchains.
Our paper connects the literature on platform eco-
nomics to dynamic corporate ﬁnance, especially the
studies emphasizing the role of ﬁnancial slack and is-
suance costs (e.g., Bolton et al., 2011; Hugonnier et al.,
2015; Décamps et al., 2016 ). Instead of cash management,
we analyze platforms’ token-supply management when
investment induces user network effects and, importantly,
the token price varies endogenously as users respond to
supply variation. 9 From a methodological perspective, our
paper is related to Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2016) and
Li (2017) , who both study the endogenous price determi-
9 Related to Cagan (1956) , the entrepreneur essentially maximizes the
present value of seigniorage ﬂows.
nation of inside money (deposits) issued by banks. The
key distinction is that tokens are outside money instead of
liabilities of the platforms.
Our paper contributes to the broad literature on
digital platforms. Studies on traditional platforms (e.g.,
Rochet and Tirole, 2003 ) do not consider the use of
tokens as platforms’ native currencies (local means of
payment). 10 We share the view on platform tokens with
Brunnermeier et al. (2019) : a platform is a currency area
where a unique set of economic activities take place
and its tokens derive value by facilitating the associated
transactions. 11 Beyond this, we emphasize that a platform
can invest in its quality, for example, payment eﬃciency
( Duﬃe, 2019 ), thereby raising token value. We are the
ﬁrst to formally analyze how platforms manage their
investment and payout through token supply, and provide
insights into the incentives and strategies of platform
businesses.
Our paper adds to emerging studies on blockchains
and cryptocurrencies (see Chen et al. (2020) for a re-
view). We innovate upon CLW by endogenizing token
supply and incorporating the entrepreneur’s long-term
interests (franchise value), which allows us to explore
new issues concerning the dynamics of optimal platform
investment and ﬁnancing, the conﬂict of interest between
the entrepreneur and users, and the role of blockchain
technology in platform economics. 12 By doing so, we
are able to provide the ﬁrst uniﬁed theory of dynamic
10 Stulz (2019) reviews the recent ﬁnancial innovations by major digital
platforms.
11 Our model differs from the majority of monetary-policy models be-
cause token issuance ﬁnances investment, as in Bolton and Huang (2017) ,
and payout rather than to stimulate nominal aggregate demand.
12 The studies on the design issues of tokens (e.g., Proof-of-Work proto-
cols) typically assume a ﬁxed user base (e.g., Chiu and Wong, 2015; Chiu
and Koeppl, 2017 ). A ﬁxed token supply is a common feature among the
models that examine the roles of tokens among users and contributors
(e.g., miners in Sockin and Xiong, 2018; Pagnotta, 2018 ) and the existing
models of token valuation (e.g., Fanti et al., 2019 ).
975

===== PAGE 5 =====

L.W. Cong, Y. Li and N. Wang Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 972–991
corporate ﬁnance of post-launch platforms: optimal mon-
etary, investment, and payout policies with both token
price and user base being endogenously determined. We
also demonstrate the commitment value of blockchains. 13
Hinzen et al. (2019) show that limited adoption is an equi-
librium outcome in Proof-of-Work (PoW) blockchains and
Irresberger et al. (2019) empirically document that Proof-
of-Stake (PoS) blockchains dominate in adoption scale. Our
focus is on the use of tokens for platform ﬁnance and
endogenous adoption, regardless of the consensus protocol
and level of decentralization issues we explore in CLW.
Furthermore, our paper adds to the discussion on token
price volatility and stablecoins. On the demand side, high
token price volatility could be an inherent feature of plat-
form tokens due to technology uncertainty and endoge-
nous user adoption (see CLW). 14 Saleh (2018) emphasizes
that token supply under Proof-of-Burn (PoB) protocols can
reduce price volatility. We endogenize both the demand
for tokens driven by users’ transaction needs and dynamic
adoption, and the supply of tokens for platform develop-
ment and the founders’ rent extraction. We show that the
optimal token supply strategy stabilizes the token price.
Finally, our paper is broadly related to the literature
on crowdsourcing and the gig economy. Blockchain-based
consensus provisions in the form of cryptocurrency mining
and resources (capital) raised via initial coin offerings
(ICOs) are salient examples of decentralized on-demand
contributions. Previous studies on ICOs and crowdfunding
focus on one-time issuance of tokens before the platform
launches (e.g., Canidio, 2018; Chod and Lyandres, 2018;
Garratt and Van Oordt, 2019 ), yet platforms increase token
supply on an on-going basis. Other studies center around
the founders’ hidden efforts or asymmetric information
pre-launch, whereas we emphasize decentralized contrib-
utors’ effort post-launch that is highly relevant for digital
platforms and the gig economy. 15 This distinction is a key
consideration in determining whether or not tokens are
securities or not based on the Howey test. 16
2. The model
In our model, three types of agents interact in a
continuous-time economy: an entrepreneur (used inter-
13 Even though commitments through tokens can be valuable in var-
ious settings (e.g., Goldstein et al., 2019 ), in practice, the reliability of
blockchain and the associated commitment value are not free of costs
( Abadi and Brunnermeier, 2018 ). As analyzed by Biais et al. (2019) ,
Proof-of-Work protocols can lead to competing records of transactions
(“forks”). Commitment is often implemented via smart contracts, for
which Cong and He (2019) provide some examples.
14 Hu et al. (2018) and Liu and Tsyvinski (2021) document token price
dynamics empirically.
15 The entrepreneurs in the ICO models do not engage in dynamic token
management for long-term platform development, and thus, do not con-
cern the franchise value. Despite newly issued tokens from platforms, de-
centralized contributors such as miners can also receive transaction fees
(e.g., Basu et al., 2019; Easley et al., 2019; Huberman et al., 2019; Lehar
and Parlour, 2020 ).
16 For example, the SEC sued Telegram/TON that raised US$1.7 bil-
lion through a private placement for not complying with securities laws
( Michaels, 2019 ). The issue boils down to whether token investors post-
launch expect to proﬁt from the entrepreneurs’ effort s or decentralized
contributions.
changeably with “platform owners”), a pool of contrib-
utors, and a unit measure of users. The entrepreneur,
representing the group of platform founders, key person-
nel, and venture investors, designs the platform’s protocol.
Contributors, who represent individual miners (transaction
ledger keepers), third-party app developers, and other
providers of on-demand labor in practice, devote efforts
and resources required for the operation and continuing
development of the platform. Users conduct peer-to-peer
transactions and realize trade surpluses on the platform. A
generic consumption good serves as the numeraire.
2.1. Platform productivity and contributors
We study a dynamically evolving platform whose
productivity (synonymous with quality), A t , evolves as
follows:
dA t
A t
= L t dH t , (1)
where L t is the decentralized contribution (contributors’
resources and labor as described in Appendix A) the
entrepreneur gathers through token payments to grow A t .
dH t is an investment eﬃciency shock,
d H t = μH d t + σ H dZ t . (2)
Here Z t is a standard Brownian motion that generates the
information ﬁltration. 17 A t broadly captures marketplace
eﬃciencies, network security, processing capacity, regula-
tory conditions, users’ interests, the variety of activities
feasible on the platform, etc. It therefore directly affects
users’ utility on the platform, which is made clear below.
Our focus is on the dynamic interaction between the
entrepreneur and users, so we do not explicitly model
contributors’ decision-making but instead specify directly
the required numeraire value of compensation for L t to
be F ( L t , A t ) , which is increasing and convex in L t and
may also depend on A t . Let P t denote the unit price of
the token in terms of the numeraire goods. Given A t , to
gather L t , the platform needs to issue F ( L t , A t ) /P t units of
new tokens to workers, which adds to the total amount of
circulating tokens, M t .
A distinguishing feature of the labor supply in a “plat-
form economy” or “gig economy” is that contributions
are on-demand and contributors such as miners in Proof-
of-Work-based public blockchains or ride-share drivers
receive on-the-spot payments instead of long-term em-
ployment contracts. Tokens facilitate the acquisition of on-
demand labor by avoiding the limited commitment on the
part of the platform that arises in the implementation of
deferred compensation, especially when workers and the
platform belong to different judicial areas. Moreover, since
digital tokens are often programmable (via smart contract-
ing), escrow accounts can be set up and enforced automat-
ically so that tokens are released to workers only if their
inputs (e.g., programming codes or solutions to cryptog-
raphy puzzles) are received. Therefore, tokens also reduce
17 The process H t may result from the entrepreneur’s effort s prior to
platform launch, which we take as exogenous to differentiate our model
from models on founders’ efforts as discussed in the literature review.
976

===== PAGE 6 =====

L.W. Cong, Y. Li and N. Wang Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 972–991
the platform’s exposure to workers’ limited commitment. 18
Finally, L t can also include the capital received from
crowd-based investors. Investors receive tokens immedi-
ately, instead of receiving contracts for future payments.
When the platform is token-based, the concern of
dilution naturally arises –w o r k e r s and investors’ tokens
may depreciate if the platform issues more tokens in the
future. In other words, while tokens avoid limited commit-
ments by facilitating spot payments, the platform’s lack of
commitment against increasing the token supply is still a
concern. To see how our analysis of optimal token supply
addresses this question, we ﬁrst introduce platform users.
2.2. Platform users
As in CLW, users can conduct transactions by holding
tokens. We use x i,t to denote the value (real balance) of
agent i ’s holdings in units of numeraires. By facilitating
transactions, these holdings generate a ﬂow of utility (or
convenience yield) over dt given by:
x 1 −α
i,t
(
N γ
t A t u i
)α
dt , (3)
where N t is the platform user base, u i captures agent i ’s
needs for platform transactions, and α, γ ∈ ( 0 , 1 ) are con-
stants. Similar to CLW, we provide a theoretical foundation
in Appendix B. A crucial difference from CLW is that we
endogenize A t and the token supply M t .
The ﬂow utility of token holdings depends on N t , the
total measure of users on the platform with x i,t > 0 . 19
This speciﬁcation captures the network externality among
users, such as the greater ease of ﬁnding trading or
contracting counterparties in a larger community.
We allow users’ transaction needs, u i , to be hetero-
geneous. Let G t ( u ) and g t ( u ) denote the cross-sectional
cumulative distribution and density function respectively
that are continuously differentiable over a positive sup-
port [ U t , U t ] . u i can be broadly interpreted: For payment
blockchains (e.g., Ripple and Bitcoin), a high value of u i
reﬂects user i ’s needs for international remittance. For
smart-contracting platforms (e.g., Ethereum), u i captures
user i ’s project productivity, and token holdings facilitate
contracting. 20 In decentralized computation (e.g., Dﬁnity)
18 Another reason to introduce tokens as a means of payment for L t
is the heterogeneity in labor quality. Consider a subset of workers who
supply high-quality effort s because they better understand the technolo-
gies behind the platform. Naturally, these capable workers assign a higher
value to tokens because they are not concerned about the adverse selec-
tion problem that low-quality workers face due to their lack of technolog-
ical knowledge. In other words, in contrast to cash-based compensation,
token-based compensation screens out high-type workers and thereby
improves the match between the employer (platform) and employees
(workers).
19 One example involves a producer who accepts tokens as a means of
payment and earns net proﬁts equal to the full transaction surplus. The
proﬁts depend on the scale of operation, i.e., the sales x i,t , and variables
that determine the proﬁt margin, which include the total customer out-
reach, N t , the platform eﬃciency A t , and the producer’s idiosyncratic pro-
ductivity u i .
20 For example, in a debt contract, the borrower’s Ethereum can be held
in an escort or “margin” account, which is automatically transferred to
the lender in case of default. Posting more Ethereum as margin allows for
larger debt contracts, which in turn lead to projects of larger scale and
proﬁts.
and data storage (e.g., Filecoin) applications, u i corresponds
to the need for secure and fast access to computing power
and data.
Recall that P t denotes the unit price of a token in terms
of the numeraire. Let k i,t denote the number of tokens
that user i holds, then the real balance is:
x i,t = P t k i,t . (4)
To join the platform (i.e., k i,t > 0 ), a user incurs a ﬂow cost
φdt. For example, transacting on the platform requires
attention; account maintenance and data migration also
take effort. Therefore, only agents with suﬃciently high u i
choose to join the platform.
Let y i,t denote user i ’s cumulative utility from platform
activities. We follow CLW and assume that the users are
well-diversiﬁed so that their transaction surpluses and
ﬁnancial gains on the platform are priced by an exogenous
stochastic discount factor. Thus, we can interpret the
equilibrium dynamics as dynamics under the risk-neutral
measure. When users are risk neutral, the risk–neutral
measure coincides with the data-generating probability
(physical measure). User i ’s objective is given by:
E
[ ∫ ∞
0
e −rt dy i,t
]
, (5)
where the incremental utility dy i,t is:
dy i,t = max
{
0 , max
k i,t > 0
[
( P t k i,t )
1 −α (
N γ
t A t u i
)α
d t + k i,t E t [ d P t ]
−φd t − P t k i,t rd t ]
}
. (6)
The outer “max ”o p e r a t o r in Eq. (6) reﬂects user i ’s option
to leave and obtain zero surplus from platform activities,
and the inner “max ”o p e r a t o r reﬂects user i ’s optimal
choice of k i,t . Inside the inner max operator are four
terms that give the incremental transaction surpluses from
platform activities. The ﬁrst corresponds to the payment
convenience yield given in Eq. (3) . The second is the
expected capital gains from holding k i,t units of tokens.
The third is the participation cost and the last term is the
ﬁnancing) cost of holding k i,t units of tokens.
It is worth emphasizing that platform users must hold
tokens for at least an instant, dt, to complete transactions
and derive utility ﬂows, and are therefore exposed to a to-
ken price change over dt. Appendix A contains motivating
examples and institutional details. We implicitly assume a
liquid secondary market for tokens. Hence, after receiving
tokens, decentralized contributors can immediately sell
tokens to users. Contributors can also be users themselves,
and the model is not changed as long as the utility from
token usage and the disutility from contributing L t (which
gives rise to F ( ·) ) are additively separable.
2.3. The entrepreneur
We collectively refer to the founding entrepreneurs, the
key developers, and initial investors who own the platform
as the entrepreneur. Importantly, the entrepreneur designs
the platform protocols and determines the investment
strategies { L t , t ≥ 0 } . Over time, the entrepreneur receives
977

===== PAGE 7 =====

L.W. Cong, Y. Li and N. Wang Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 972–991
a cumulative number of tokens D t as dividends and,
similar to users, evaluates the tokens with a risk-neutral
objective function and discount rate r:
max
{ L t ,D t } t≥0
∫ + ∞
t=0
E
[
e −rt P t dD t
[
I { dD t ≥0 } + ( 1 + χ) I { dD t < 0 }
]]
. (7)
When dD t > 0 , the entrepreneur receives token dividends
that have a market value P t per unit, as a form of compen-
sation for his essential human capital. 21 Note that token
dividends can be either continuous (i.e., of dt order) or
lumpy, and that in equilibrium, the entrepreneur immedi-
ately sells her tokens to users who are the natural buyers
of tokens because they derive an extra convenience yield
from token holdings.
We allow the entrepreneur to buy back and burn tokens
to reduce the token supply (i.e., d D t < 0 ). When d D t < 0 ,
the entrepreneur raises external ﬁnancing (numeraire
goods) at a proportional cost χ for token buyback. 22 By
reducing token supply, the entrepreneur can boost token
price, and consequently increase the value of future token
dividends. A higher token price also allows the platform to
gather more resources for productivity growth. We allow
the amount of token buyback to be continuous (i.e., of dt
order) or lumpy.
The key accounting identity that describes the evo-
lution of token supply entails both the tokens issued
to ﬁnance platform investment and the entrepreneur’s
dividend/buyback:
d M t =
F ( L t , A t )
P t
d t + d D t . (8)
When the platform invests (the ﬁrst term on the right-
hand side) or distributes token dividends ( dD t > 0 ), the
total amount of tokens in circulation increases; the token
supply decreases when the entrepreneur burns tokens out
of circulation ( dD t < 0 ). 23 In the next section, we show
that the entrepreneur’s ﬁnancial slack decreases in M t .
An increase in M t depresses token price P t , so when M t
rises to a suﬃciently high level, the entrepreneur, who
is concerned over the value of future token payouts (i.e.,
the continuation value), pays the ﬁnancing cost to raise
funds for token buyback that token price. Therefore, under
the ﬁnancing cost χ, managing the token stock is akin to
managing cash inventory, as in Bolton et al. (2011) and
Hugonnier et al. (2015) . A ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial slack increases in
21 For example, blockchain behemoth Bitmain Technologies Ltd. and
Founders Fund (known for early bets on SpaceX and Airbnb) invest in EOS
and hold ownership stakes that entitle them to future token rewards. The
gradual distribution of token dividends can be viewed as contingent vest-
ing in reality –a  certain amount of total tokens D t have been allocated
by time t but are distributed over time (via dD t ) depending on the stages
of platform development and the tokens outstanding (i.e., different values
of A t and M t ).
22 The external ﬁnancing cost assumption (via parameter χ) is in line
with those in the corporate ﬁnance literature, e.g., Bolton et al. (2011) and
Hugonnier et al. (2015) , who model in reduced form the information, in-
centive, and transactions costs of raising external funds.
23 It is suboptimal for the platform to pay contributors with costly ex-
ternal ﬁnancing. Instead, it is generally optimal to use tokens (internal
ﬁnancing) to compensate contributors as doing so delays incurring the
costs of external ﬁnancing. However, using tokens as internal funds in-
curs a shadow cost because an increase in token supply depresses token
price, which reduces the entrepreneur’s token payout value.
its cash holdings, because when its cash dries up, the ﬁrm
has to resort to costly external funds. In our model, the
ﬁnancial slack decreases in token supply, because when
the token supply rises too high, the entrepreneur has to
buy back tokens with costly external funds.
In Deﬁnition 1 , we characterize a Markov equilibrium.
The two state variables are the productivity A t , which
measures the technological aspect of the platform, and the
token supply M t , which inversely measures the ﬁnancial
slack.
Deﬁnition 1 . A Markov equilibrium with state variables A t
and M t is comprised of agents’ decisions and token price
dynamics, such that the token market-clearing condition
holds, users optimally decide to participate (or not) and
choose token holdings, contributors supply resources for
the compensation of F ( L t , A t ) in numeraire value, and the
platform strategies, i.e., L t and D t , are optimally designed
to maximize the entrepreneur’s value.
3. Dynamic equilibrium
We ﬁrst derive the entrepreneur’s optimal investment
and token payout and buyback, which in turn pin down
the token supply. We then derive platform users’ optimal
decisions on adoption and token holding in order to
aggregate token demand. Finally, token market clearing
yields the equilibrium dynamics of token price.
3.1. Optimal token supply
At time t, the entrepreneur’s continuation or franchise
value V t (i.e., the time- t value function) satisﬁes the
following Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman (HJB) equation:
rV ( M t , A t ) dt = max L t ,dD t P t dD t
[
I { dD t ≥0 } + ( 1 + χ) I { dD t < 0 }
]
+ V M t
[
F ( L t , A t )
P t
dt + dD t
]
+ V A t A t L t μH dt +
1
2
V A t A t A 2
t L 2
t (σ H ) 2 dt. (9)
The ﬁrst term in this HJB equation reﬂects the dividend
payout ( dD t > 0 ) and buyback ( dD t < 0 ). When there are
more tokens in circulation, the token price is depressed
and the entrepreneur’s continuation value is reduced.
Therefore, we expect V M t < 0 , which we later conﬁrm in
the numerical solution. Payout occurs only if −V M t ≤ P t ,
i.e., the market value of token weakly exceeds the marginal
cost of increasing token supply. Token buyback happens
when −V M t ≥ P t ( 1 + χ) , i.e., the marginal beneﬁt of de-
creasing token supply is not lower than the cost of burning
tokens. The second term is the product of the marginal
value of token supply, V M t , and the drift of token supply,
which consists of tokens paid to contributors and tokens
distributed to or burned by the entrepreneur. The third
term is the marginal beneﬁt of an increase in A t . The
productivity increases in L t , but obtaining L t with token
payments increases the token supply M t , which has a
marginal cost of V M t
F L t
P t dt. Moreover, investment outcome
is uncertain, so the fourth term captures how such risk
978

===== PAGE 8 =====

L.W. Cong, Y. Li and N. Wang Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 972–991
enters into the choice of L t . We summarize the optimal
policies in Proposition 1
Proposition 1 (Optimal Token Supply). The optimal L t is
solved implicitly as a function of state variables, A t and M t ,
by:
V A t A t μH + V A t A t A 2
t L ∗
t
(σ H )2
= F L ( L ∗
t , A t )
(−V M t
P t
)
. (10)
The optimal dD t is characterized as follows: the entrepreneur
receives token payouts ( dD ∗
t > 0 ) when P t ≥− V M t , and buys
back and burns tokens ( dD ∗
t < 0 ) when −V M t ≥ P t ( 1 + χ) .
In Eq. (10) , we equate the marginal beneﬁt of in-
vestment to the marginal cost. The left-hand side is the
marginal impact on the drift of A t , evaluated by the
entrepreneur’s marginal value of A t growth and adjusted
for the risk of productivity shock via the second term.
The right-hand side is the marginal cost of investment.
Since the entrepreneur’s marginal cost of token sup-
ply can be larger than the market value of tokens, the
physical marginal cost F L is multiplied by −V M t /P t . This
multiplier reﬂects a token issuance cost. Here the plat-
form pays for investment with “undervalued” tokens.
The payout/buyback policy in Proposition 1 implies that
−V M t /P t ∈ [ 1 , 1 + χ] . Because the entrepreneur incurs a
ﬁnancing cost χ > 0 when burning tokens, there exists a
region of ( M t , A t ) such that V M t /P t > 1 , which reﬂects the
cost of issuing tokens. A corollary from Proposition 1 high-
lights the link between off-platform capital-market
frictions and the platform’s token issuance cost:
Corollary 1 (Token Issuance Cost). The ﬁnancing cost χ > 0
leads to a token issuance cost for the entrepreneur (i.e.,
−V M t /P t > 1 for a positive measure of ( M t , A t ) ). The issuance
cost distorts the investment policy by amplifying the marginal
cost of investment in Eq. (10) .
Token issuance cost arises even though the token mar-
ket is perfectly liquid. The ﬁnancing cost creates a conﬂict
of interest between the insider (the entrepreneur) and
outsiders (users). A productivity enhancement paid with
new tokens beneﬁts users via a higher convenience yield.
But more tokens in circulation implies a higher likelihood
of token buyback and incidence of ﬁnancing cost in the
future for the entrepreneur. While the entrepreneur bears
the ﬁnancing cost, the beneﬁts are shared with users.
Admittedly, as the token demand strengthens following
a productivity increase, the entrepreneur beneﬁts from a
higher token price (and higher value of token payout), but
the entrepreneur cannot capture the full surplus.
Users are heterogeneous in deriving convenience yield
from tokens, so only the marginal user breaks even after
token price increases, while those who derive more con-
venience yield capture a positive surplus. The intuition
is similar to that in a monopolistic producer’s problem
when full price discrimination is impossible. Here tokens
are traded at a prevailing price among competitive users,
so the entrepreneur cannot extract more value from users
who derive a higher convenience yield than the marginal
token holder.
As such, token-based ﬁnancing naturally exhibits token
overhang, which is underinvestment due to the leakage of
surplus to users. Uncertainty also plays a critical role here.
Without dZ t , the productivity shock, L t , always increases
A t . Then, with a suﬃciently eﬃcient investment technol-
ogy F ( ·) (so that relatively few new tokens are needed to
pay for L t ), we arrive at a situation where, following in-
vestment, A t always grows faster than M t . As we will show
below, the entrepreneur conducts costly token buyback
when M t is too high relative to A t . Thus, with A t always
growing faster than M t , the entrepreneur always moves
away from costly token buyback after making an invest-
ment. As a result, the ﬁnancing cost is never a concern
given this suﬃciently eﬃcient F ( ·) . However, in the pres-
ence of uncertainty in investment outcome, there always
exists a probability that M t increases faster than A t after
investment, moving the platform closer to costly buyback.
In sum, the mechanism of token overhang relies
on three ingredients in the model. First, when the en-
trepreneur raises consumption goods to buy tokens out
of circulation, the entrepreneur faces a ﬁnancing cost.
Second, users are heterogeneous in deriving convenience
yield from token holdings, so under a single token price
that clears the competitive market, only the marginal user
breaks even. Third, the outcome of platform investment
is uncertain. The ﬁrst ingredient creates a private cost of
investment for the entrepreneur, and the second implies a
surplus leakage to users. Together, they generate a conﬂict
of interest between the entrepreneur and users. Finally,
the third ingredient, uncertainty, is needed so that despite
the speciﬁcation of F ( ·) , token overhang always exists.
Our characterization of the optimal investment and
payout/buyback policies in some sense allays the concern
over fraudulent designs or manipulations by the founding
developers, for example, through building “back doors” in
the protocol to steal tokens and depress the token price
when selling the stolen tokens in secondary markets. As
shown in Proposition 1 , our setup allows the entrepreneur
to extract tokens as dividends, and the optimal payout
policy already maximizes the entrepreneur’s value. In
other words, the policy is incentive-compatible in this
subgame perfect equilibrium between a large player (the
entrepreneur) and a continuum of small players (users).
From a regulatory perspective, a proposal of blockchain or
platform design should disclose the policy of token payout
to the platform owners, and it should be broadly in line
with the above characterization.
3.2. Aggregate token demand
We conjecture and later verify that in equilibrium, the
token price, P t , evolves as
d P t = P t μP
t d t + P t σ P
t dZ t , (11)
where μP
t and σ P
t are endogenously determined. Agents
take the price process as given under rational expecta-
tion. Conditioning on joining the platform, user i chooses
the optimal token holdings, k ∗
i,t , by using the following
ﬁrst-order condition,
( 1 − α)
(
N γ
t A t u i
P t k ∗
i,t
)α
+ μP
t = r , (12)
979

===== PAGE 9 =====

L.W. Cong, Y. Li and N. Wang Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 972–991
which states that the sum of marginal transaction surplus
on the platform and the expected token price change is
equal to the required rate of return, r.
Rearranging this equation, we obtain the following
expression for optimal token holdings:
k ∗
i,t =
N γ
t A t u i
P t
(
1 − α
r − μP
t
) 1
α
. (13)
k ∗
i,t has several properties. First, users hold more tokens
when the common productivity, A t , or user-speciﬁc trans-
action need, u i , is high, and also when the user base,
N t , is larger due to network effects. Eq. (13) reﬂects an
investment motive to hold tokens, that is k ∗
i,t increases in
the expected token appreciation, μP
t .
Using k ∗
i,t , we obtain the following expression for the
user’s maximized proﬁts conditional on participating on
the platform:
N γ
t A t u i α
(
1 − α
r − μP
t
) 1 −αα
− φ. (14)
User i only participates when the preceding expression is
non-negative. That is, only those users with suﬃciently
large u i participate. Let u t denote the type of the marginal
user, then
u t = u
(
N t ; A t , μP
t
)
=
φ
N γ
t A t α
(
r − μP
t
1 − α
) 1 −αα
. (15)
The adoption threshold u t decreases in A t because a more
productive platform attracts more users. The threshold
also decreases when users expect a higher token price
appreciation (i.e., higher μP
t ). Because only agents with
u i ≥ u t participate, the user base is then:
N t = 1 − G t ( u t ) . (16)
Eqs. (15) and (16) jointly determine the user base N t given
A t and μP
t . 24
Proposition 2 (Token Demand and User Base). Given A t and
μP
t , the platform has a positive user base when Eqs. (15) and
(16) have solutions for u t and N t . Conditional on participat-
ing, user i ’s optimal token holding, k ∗
i,t , is given by Eq. (13) .
The token holding, k ∗
i,t , decreases in P t and increases in A t ,
μP
t , u i , and N t .
3.3. Token market clearing
Clearing the token market pins down the token price.
We deﬁne the participants’ aggregate transaction need by
aggregating u i of participating users:
U t :=
∫
u ≥u t
ug t ( u ) du. (17)
The market-clearing condition is:
M t =
∫
i ∈ [ 0 , 1 ]
k ∗
i,t di. (18)
24 We do not consider the trivial solution of zero adoption, which always
leads to a zero token price.
Substituting optimal holdings in Eq. (13) into the market-
clearing condition in Eq. (18) , we arrive at the token
pricing formula in Proposition 3 .
Proposition 3 (Token Pricing). The equilibrium token price is
given by
P t =
N γ
t U t A t
M t
(
1 − α
r − μP
t
) 1
α
. (19)
Token price increases in N t . The larger the user base,
the higher the trade surplus individual participants can
realize by holding tokens, and the stronger the token
demand. The price-to-user base ratio increases in the
productivity, the expected price appreciation, and the
network participants’ aggregate transaction need, while
it decreases in the token supply M t . 25 Eq. (19) implies a
differential equation for P t in the state space of ( M t , A t ) .
This can be clearly seen once we apply the inﬁnitesimal
generator to P t = P ( M t , A t ) , expressing μP
t into a collection
of ﬁrst and second derivatives of P t by Itô’s lemma. Note
that the equilibrium user base, N t , is already a function
of A t and μP
t , as shown in Proposition (2) . Therefore, the
collection of token market-clearing conditions at every t
essentially characterize the full dynamics of token price.
This method of solving token price follows CLW.
Eqs. (8) and (18) describe the primary and secondary
token markets. The change of M t is a ﬂow variable, given
by Eq. (8) , that includes the new issuances from platform
investment and payout and the repurchases by the en-
trepreneur. The token supply M t is a stock variable, and
through Eq. (18) , it equals the token demand of users.
The problem faced by a token-based platform is remi-
niscent of a durable-good monopoly problem (e.g., Coase,
1972; Stokey, 1981; Bulow, 1982 ). First, token issuance
permanently increases the supply. When issuing tokens to
ﬁnance investment or payout, the entrepreneur is compet-
ing with future selves. Second, given a zero physical cost
of creating tokens, the Coase intuition seems applicable:
The entrepreneur can be tempted to satisfy the residual
demand by ever lowering token price as long as the price
is positive (i.e., above the marginal cost of production).
Thus, users wait for lower prices, driving the token price
to zero. Our model differs from the Coasian setting in two
aspects. First, even though the physical cost of producing
tokens is zero, the dynamic token issuance cost increases
in the token supply as we show in the next section.
This is reminiscent of the result in Kahn (1986) that the
Coase intuition does not hold in the presence of increasing
marginal cost of production. Second, in contrast to theories
of durable-good monopoly, token demand in our model
is not stationary; in fact, it increases geometrically with
the endogenously growing A t , so users cannot expect a
25 The formula reﬂects certain observations by practitioners, such as in-
corporating DAA (daily active addresses) and NVT ratio (market cap to
daily transaction volume) into token valuation framework, but instead of
heuristically aggregating such inputs into a pricing formula, we solve both
token pricing and user adoption as an equilibrium outcome. See, for ex-
ample, Today ’ s Crypto Asset Valuation Frameworks by Ashley Lannquist
at Blockchain at Berkeley and Haas FinTech.
980

===== PAGE 10 =====

L.W. Cong, Y. Li and N. Wang Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 972–991
lower token price in the future. Therefore, we can solve an
equilibrium with a positive token price in the next section.
4. Equilibrium characterization
We further characterize the equilibrium by analytically
deriving and numerically solving the system of differential
equations concerning token price and the entrepreneur’s
value function. To streamline exposition and focus on core
economic insights, we make some intuitive parametric
assumptions.
4.1. User distribution and investment cost function
We assume that u i follows the commonly used Pareto
distribution on [ U t , + ∞ ) with cumulative probability
function (c.d.f.) given by the Pareto distribution:
G t ( u ) = 1 −
(U t
u
)ξ
, (20)
where ξ > 1 and U t = 1 /
(ωA κ
t
)
, ω > 0 , and κ ∈ [ 0 , 1 ] . The
cross-section mean of u i is ξU t
ξ−1 . It is assumed that U t de-
creases in A t , which reﬂects the competition from follower
platforms inspired by the success (high A t ) of the platform
in question. For example, after the success of Bitcoin,
alternative blockchains emerge as competitors in the area
of payments. Similarly, there are alternative platforms
to Ethereum for smart contracting. The overall effects of
competition depend on the parameters ω and κ, while the
parameter ξ governs how heterogeneous users transaction
needs ( u i ) are (i.e., the dispersion of u i distribution). Ap-
pendix D provides comparative statics of these parameters.
Lemma 1 (Parameterized User Base). Given A t and μP
t , from
Proposition 2 , we have a unique non-degenerate solution, N t ,
from Eqs. (15) and (16) , given by:
N t = A ′
t
( α
ωφ
) ξ
1 −ξγ
(
1 − α
r − μP
t
)
(
ξ
1 −ξγ
)
(
1 −α
α )
,
where A ′
t ≡ A
(1 −κ)( ξ
1 −ξγ )
t , (21)
if u t ≥ 1
ωA κ
t
, i.e., A 1 −κ
t ( 1 −α
r−μP
t
)
1 −αα ≤ ωφ
α ; otherwise, N t = 1 .
A ′
t is a transformed version of A t . It is the effective
productivity that captures user homogeneity, platform
competition, and user network effects. Intuitively, the way
productivity matters is ampliﬁed by the network-effect
parameter γ (introduced in Eq. (3) ) but dampened by the
competition parameter κ. When there is no network effect
( γ = 0 ) or competition ( κ = 0 ), the exponent is simply
ξ, which measures user heterogeneity. The effect of user
heterogeneity has two components. One is the interaction
component with γ, as seen in the denominator of ξ
1 −ξγ .
When agents are more homogeneous (larger ξ), small
changes in A t brings big changes in adoption, which is
ampliﬁed by network effects. The second component is in
the numerator of ξ
1 −ξγ . Even without the network effect,
greater homogeneity still means that there is a bigger
adoption sensitivity with respect to platform productivity.
Our later discussion focuses on ξγ < 1 , so that the user
base, N t , increases in the platform productivity despite
platform competition. This is realistic because a technol-
ogy leader usually beneﬁts from its innovation despite the
presence of competing followers. Moreover, we focus on
low values of A t , such that N t < 1 in the Markov equilib-
rium so as to examine how token allocation interacts with
user base dynamics. Under the Pareto distribution, the
aggregate transaction need is given by:
U t = N t
( ξ u t
ξ −1
)
. (22)
Lemma 2 (Parameterized Token Price). The equilibrium
token price in Proposition 3 when N t < 1 is given by:
P t =
A ′
t
M t
ξ
(ξ −1) ω
ξ
1 −ξγ
(α
φ
) ξ
1 −ξγ −1 (
1 − α
r − μP
t
)1+
(
ξ
1 −ξγ
)
(
1 −α
α )
.
(23)
Next, we follow previous studies on investment in ﬁ-
nance and macroeconomics (e.g., Hayashi, 1982 ) to specify
a convex (quadratic) investment cost function:
F ( L t , A t ) =
(
L t +
θ
2
L 2
t
)
A ′
t , (24)
and θ ≥ 0 can depend on the elasticity of contributors’
resource supply. The particular functional form ensures
analytical tractability because F (L t , A t ) being linear in A ′
not only captures the reality that contribution compensa-
tion depends on the effective productivity of the platform,
but also allows us to reduce the dimensionality of the
state variables when solving the model. The speciﬁcation
also allows us to characterize optimality via the ﬁrst-order
condition for investment, similar to the F.O.Cs in Hayashi-
style q-theoretic models with convex adjustment costs. In
general, the investment cost is higher when the platform
is more productive because incremental improvements in
the productivity become harder (note that L t enters into
the growth rate of A t ). It is quadratic in the decentral-
ized contribution the entrepreneur gathers to reﬂect the
increasing marginal cost of adding L t . 26 For example, to
induce more miners to mine Bitcoin, more rewards must
be given as miners’ competition drives up their cost of
mining through higher electricity prices.
We characterize a Markov equilibrium in a transformed
state space. The equilibrium variables depend on ( m t , A t ) ,
where the productivity-normalized token supply is given
by:
m t =
M t
A ′
t
. (25)
26 While we view this as a reasonable starting point, we are fully aware
that the implicit adjustment costs for labor or capital may not be con-
vex. Investment may be lumpy and ﬁxed costs can be important in real-
ity. In corporate ﬁnance, Hugonnier et al. (2015) show that lumpy invest-
ment for a ﬁnancially constrained ﬁrm facing costly external equity is-
suance generates different investment and ﬁnancing dynamics from those
in a model based on smooth investment adjustment costs, for example,
Bolton et al. (2011) . For example, Hugonnier et al. (2015) show that the
value function may not be globally concave and smooth pasting condi-
tions may not guarantee optimality.
981

===== PAGE 11 =====

L.W. Cong, Y. Li and N. Wang Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 972–991
By inspecting Eq. (23) , we can see that m t is the only state
variable driving the token price. By Itô’s lemma, μP
t is a
function of m t if and only if P t is a function of m t .
Moreover, the entrepreneur’s value function exhibits a
homogeneity property, V (M t , A t ) = v (m t ) A ′
t . These prop-
erties signiﬁcantly simplify our analysis. In the interior
region where dD t = 0 , denoting (1 − κ)( ξ
1 −ξγ ) by δ, we
simplify the HJB Eq. (9) under V t = v (m t ) A ′
t to an ordinary
differential equation for v (m t ) , as follows:
rv ( m t ) = max
L t
v ′ ( m t )
(
L t + θ
2 L 2
t
)
P t
+
[v ( m t ) − v ′ ( m t ) m t
]
×
[
δμH L t +
1
2
δ(δ −1)(σ H ) 2 L 2
t
]
+
1
2
v ′′ ( m t ) m 2
t δ2 (σ H ) 2 L 2
t . (26)
Under the speciﬁcation of F (·) in Eq. (24) , the HJB
equation implies the following optimal investment via the
standard ﬁrst-order condition.
Lemma 3 (Parameterized Optimal Investment). Under the
speciﬁcation of investment cost function, F (·) , in Eq. (24) , the
optimal investment is given by:
L ∗
t =
[v ( m t ) − v ′ ( m t ) m t
]δμH + v ′ ( m t )
P t
− v ′ ( m t )
P t θ − v ′′ ( m t ) m 2
t δ2 (σ H )2 −δ(δ −1)(σ H ) 2 [ v ( m t ) − v ′ ( m t ) m t ]
.
(27)
The optimality conditions for dD t give us the boundary
conditions for solving v ( m t ) and P (m t ) . The marginal value
of retained tokens must be equal to the market value,
−v ′ ( m ) = P ( m ) , (28)
at the optimal payout boundary, m , and we have the
standard “super contact” condition:
−v ′′ ( m ) = P ′ ( m ) . (29)
As the payout boundary is a reﬂecting boundary, to rule
out arbitrage in the token market, we have:
P ′ ( m ) = 0 . (30)
Intuitively, the distribution of token dividends happens
when the token supply is suﬃciently small relative to the
platform productivity, i.e., low m t . Similarly, at the buyback
boundary, denoted by m , we have the following conditions:
−v ′ ( m ) = P ( m ) ( 1 + χ) ; (31)
−v ′′ ( m ) = P ′ ( m ) ( 1 + χ) ; (32)
P ′ ( m ) = 0 . (33)
The optimal amounts of token payout or buyback
are determined as follows. The payout boundary, m , is
a reﬂecting boundary of m t = M t /A ′
t . When m t = m , any
decrease of m t (e.g., due to a positive shock to A ′
t ) leads to
payout, and the payout amount is precisely equal to the
increase in M t (the numerator) that is required to bring
m t back up to m . Similarly, at the buyback boundary, m ,
is also a reﬂecting boundary of m t . At m , any increase
of m t (e.g., due to a negative shock to A ′
t ) leads to token
buyback, and the buyback amount is equal to the decrease
in M t that is required to bring m t back down to m .
Proposition 4 (Solving the Markov Equilibrium). With
Lemmas 1 , 2 , and 3 , there exists a Markov equilibrium with
A t (equivalently A ′
t ) and m t = M t /A ′
t as the state variables,
and the equilibrium has the following properties:
(i) P ( m t ) and v ( m t ) uniquely solve the system of ordinary
differential equations given by Eqs. (23) and (26) subject to
boundary conditions given by Eqs. (28) to (33) .
(ii) The entrepreneur’s optimal investment L t and deci-
sions on whether to payout ( dD t > 0 ) or buy back tokens
( D t < 0 ) all depend on m t only.
(iii) Users’ optimal token holdings and participation deci-
sions, together with the user base depend on both m t and A t ,
according to Proposition 2 .
For the parameters that affect user activities, we follow
CLW to set α = 0 . 3 , φ = 1 , r = 0 . 05 , and the volatility
parameter, σ H = 2 . For the mean productivity growth, we
set μH = 0 . 5 , which generates a μP
t in line with the values
in CLW. We set χ = 7% for the ﬁnancing cost following
empirical studies on equity issuance ( Eckbo et al., 2007 ).
We set θ = 10 , 0 0 0 so the growth rate of productivity is
in line with that in CLW. The rest of parameters are to il-
lustrate the qualitative implications of the model: γ = 1 / 8
for the network effect and ξ = 2 , κ = 5 / 8 , and ω = 100 for
the distribution parameters of u i . The model’s qualitative
implications are robust to the choice of these parameters.
Blockchain platforms often feature a maximum to-
tal token supply. One way to incorporate this into our
framework is to have an absorbing upper bound of m t ,
say ˜ m . In such case, once reaching a multiple of the
platform productivity, i.e., ˜ m A ′
t , the supply would grow
proportionally with A ′
t forever, and according to Lemma 2 ,
token price will then be a constant. As for newly issued
tokens, they are divided between the entrepreneur and
contributors, and here the entrepreneur faces a standard
consumption-savings trade-off: If she takes a larger share
of the new tokens, the productivity grows slower. We
leave this extension for future research.
4.2. Endogenous platform development
In Panel A of Fig. 2 , we plot the A ′ -scaled value function
v ( m t ) . The curve starts at the payout boundary where the
entrepreneur receives payouts in the form of newly issued
tokens, and it ends at the buyback boundary where the
entrepreneur raises funds to buy back and burn tokens
out of circulation in order to support token price and the
continuation value.
The entrepreneur’s value declines in the normalized
token supply (a notion of “inﬂation” practitioners casually
refer to). Intuitively, when more tokens are circulating
relative to productivity, it is more likely for the en-
trepreneur to reach the buyback (upper) boundary and
pay the ﬁnancing cost, and in the less likely event of token
payout, the entrepreneur receives a lower value due to
the depressed token price. The value function is always
positive in Panel A, suggesting that the entrepreneur never
abandons the platform.
982

===== PAGE 12 =====

L.W. Cong, Y. Li and N. Wang Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 972–991
Fig. 2. Platform value and investment. In Panel A, we plot the A ′
t -scaled value function. Panel B plots the optimal investment as a function of productivity-
normalized token supply, m t . Panel C shows the ratio of the entrepreneur’s marginal value of tokens to the market price of tokens, and the wedge between
this ratio and one represents the token issuance cost. Panel D shows the entrepreneur’s marginal value of A ′
t .
In Panel B of Fig. 2 , we plot the optimal platform
investment (given by Eq. (27) ) against the normalized
token supply. In Eq. (27) , the optimal L ∗
t decreases in
−V M t /P t , the ratio of the marginal cost of token issuance,
−V M t = −v ′ (m t ) , to the token market price, P t . This ratio
measures the valuation gap between the entrepreneur and
the platform users (i.e., the token issuance cost). When the
gap is high, it is costly from the entrepreneur’s perspective
to ﬁnance investment with tokens. The ratio starts at
one, as implied by the value-matching condition of the
payout boundary. This is when the entrepreneur’s private
valuation of tokens, which incorporates the expected cost
of token buyback, coincides with the market or users’
valuation. The gap widens as the token supply outpaces
the growth of the effective productivity, i.e., as m t in-
creases, and eventually, when the gap reaches ( 1 + χ) , the
entrepreneur optimally buys back tokens. The increasing
token issuance cost in Panel C (i.e., −V M t /P t increasing in
m t ) largely contributes to the decreasing pattern of L ∗
t .
The optimal L ∗
t given by Eq. (27) increases in
the marginal value of effective productivity, ∂V t
∂A ′
t
=
v (m t ) − v ′ (m t ) m t , because on average, investment has a
positive outcome, i.e., μH > 0 , so more resources gathered
by token payments, L t , leads to a higher expected growth
of A t and an expected increase in the entrepreneur’s value.
Moreover, the marginal value of effective productivity also
has a positive impact on L ∗
t via the denominator of L ∗
t in
Eq. (27) . As shown in the HJB Eq. (26) , the marginal value
of A ′
t is multiplied by the drift of A ′ ( = A δ
t ), which is equal
to δμH L t + 1
2 δ(δ −1)(σ H ) 2 L 2
t given dA t in Eq. (2) . The
denominator effect follows the quadratic term in the drift
of A ′
t . Near the buyback (upper) boundary, ∂V t
∂A ′
t
is partic-
ularly high because an increase in A ′
t pulls down m t and
thus reduces the likelihood of costly buyback. Overall, even
though the marginal value of productivity is increasing
in m t in Panel D, the economic force of token overhang
(Panel C) dominates, resulting in an optimal investment
that declines in the normalized token supply m t .
Finally, according to Eq. (27) , the second-order deriva-
tive of the A ′ -scaled value function, v ′′ (m t ) , also affects
the optimal investment L ∗
t via the denominator. Its impact
is small under the current parameterization, so the plot is
not included in Fig. 2 . However, the intuition of the poten-
tial precautionary motive ( v ′′ (m t ) < 0 ) is still interesting.
Token payout is largely a real option decision. While it
is not completely irreversible, reversing it (i.e., buying
back tokens) incurs the ﬁnancing cost. 27 The probability of
incurring such cost increases as m t approaches the buy-
back boundary, so the entrepreneur becomes increasingly
cautious on making a risky investment given the shock in
Eq. (2) . Therefore, the negative impact of precaution on
investment is more prominent near the buyback (upper)
boundary of m t .
Overall, our model reveals a rich set of trade-offs in the
choice of token-ﬁnanced investment. The model has the
potential to explain various features of token distribution
27 For example, the Synereo team has to hold multiple meetings and
incur effort cost to explain to users when the team burned 33% of its
cryptocurrency reserves.
983

===== PAGE 13 =====

L.W. Cong, Y. Li and N. Wang Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 972–991
Fig. 3. Token price Dynamics and user adoption. In Panel A, we plot token price against productivity-normalized token supply, m t . In Panel B, we plot σ P
t ,
the P t -scaled diffusion term of token price. In Panel C, we show the P t -scaled drift of token price. In Panel D, we plot the user base, which depends on
both m t and A ′
t .
to open-source engineers, miners (ledger maintainers),
and crowd-sourced ﬁnanciers in practice.
4.3. Token price and user adoption
The dynamics of token price are directly linked to
that of productivity-normalized token supply. As shown in
Panel A of Fig. 3 , P t declines in m t . In Appendix C, we de-
rive the negative shock loading (diffusion) of m t . Thus, a
positive shock in productivity decreases m t by increasing
A ′
t , thus moving the economy closer to the payout (lower)
boundary of m t . Token price increases in response and is
therefore procyclical with respect to productivity shock. In
stark contrast to the 200% per annum volatility of produc-
tivity shock that we input, i.e., the fundamental volatility,
σ P
t is surprisingly small (below 0.15% in Panel B of Fig. 3 )
because the entrepreneur receives newly issued tokens as
payout when m t is low and raise funds to buy back and
burn tokens when m t is high, actively moderating the vari-
ation of the token price by controlling the supply. The en-
trepreneur’s incentive to regulate the token supply is gov-
erned by her marginal cost of raising token supply, − ∂V t
∂M t =
v ′ (m t ) < 0 . Corollary 2 directly follows from Corollary 1 .
Corollary 2 . From Corollary 1 , the token price is bounded in [
−
(
1
1+ χ
)
v ′ (m t ) , −v ′ (m t )
]
.
The optimality condition on payout imposes an upper
bound on token price. At any m t , P (m t ) ≤− v ′ (m t ) because
otherwise the entrepreneur prefers obtaining token payout
(worth P (m t ) per unit of token) over preserving the con-
tinuation value (worth −v ′ (m t ) ). The optimality condition
on token buyback imposes a lower bound on token price.
At any m t , P (m t ) ≥−
(
1
1+ χ
)
v ′ (m t ) because otherwise
the entrepreneur ﬁnds tokens too cheap in the secondary
market and prefers raising costly funds to buy back tokens.
In our model, the token value has two anchors. First, users
need tokens for transactions. Second, to preserve the
continuation value, the entrepreneur is willing to pay the
ﬁnancing cost to raise funds and use such real resources
to buy back and burn tokens out of circulation.
Panel C of Fig. 3 shows the expected token price
change. When m t is low, the expectation is negative, re-
ﬂecting the likely token-supply increase due to token pay-
out to the entrepreneur and increasing investment needs
(Panel A of Fig. 2 ). As m t increases, the expected change
in token price gradually increases and eventually becomes
positive because, ﬁrst, the investment needs decline, and
second, the likelihood of token buyback increases.
Finally, we report the results on user-base dynamics. As
shown in Proposition 2 , unlike other endogenous variables
that only depends on m t , the user base N t depends on
both m t (through the expected token price change μP (m t ) )
and A ′
t . In Panel D of Fig. 3 , we plot the user base against
m t under different values of A ′
t . Given A ′
t , Panel D shows
that as m t increases (and μP
t increases), the user base
increases because agents expect an improving capital gain
984

===== PAGE 14 =====

L.W. Cong, Y. Li and N. Wang Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 972–991
from token holdings. Given any value m t , a higher value
of productivity A t leads to a larger user base because
A t directly enters users’ convenience yield from token
holdings in Eq. (3) .
Our model features mild volatility in the token price.
The entrepreneur’s optimal payout and token buyback
decisions impose two reﬂecting boundaries on the state
variable m t . At both boundaries, the ﬁrst derivative
of token price with respect to m t must be zero (e.g.,
see Eq. (30) ) because otherwise arbitrage opportunities
emerge: For example, at m , m t will be reﬂected upward, so
P ′ (m t ) > 0 ( < 0 ) implies guaranteed instantaneous proﬁts
from a long (short) position. By Itô’s lemma, P ′ (m t ) = 0 at
the boundaries implies σ P (m t ) = 0 . Therefore, even in the
interior region, token volatility σ P (m t ) can exceed zero;
however, it cannot go far beyond zero as it is tied to zero
at both boundaries.
Therefore, in our model, the stability of token price
relies on the dynamic payout and token buyback decisions
of the entrepreneur. This mechanism differs signiﬁcantly
from the stablecoin designs proposed by practitioners. A
popular approach is to mimic open market operations by
central banks. When token price is low, the platform issues
token bonds to buy back tokens. Token bonds promise to
pay the principal with interest in the future, but all pay-
ments are in tokens. The problem with this design is that
an inter-temporal substitution between current and future
tokens does not introduce any real resources to support
the token price, nor does it provide any incentive to eco-
nomic agents to devote such resources. A champion of this
design, the Basis stablecoin project, which attracted $133
million of venture capital in April 2017, has closed down all
operations, citing US securities regulations as the reason
for its decision. An alternative design is collateralization,
which backs token value with real resources, such as the
US dollar (e.g., Tether, Circle, Gemini, JPM coin, or Paxos),
oil reserves (e.g., Venezuela’s El Petro, OilCoin, or PetroDol-
lars). 28 A derivative of such design is to further tranche
the claims on real resources, so tokens are the most senior
tranche, which is less information-sensitive and thus has
a stable secondary-market value. Li and Mayer (2020) pro-
vide a model on collateralized stablecoins.
4.4. Comparative statics
We further explore the mechanism of underinvestment
by analyzing the comparative statics. Speciﬁcally, we focus
on the root of the problem, which is the cost of external
ﬁnancing for token buyback, and by comparing platforms
with different degrees of network effects, we highlight
the key role of risk in generating underinvestment. In
Appendix D, we explore how competition (captured by
the parameters ω and κ) and user distribution (captured
by the parameter ξ) affect the platform value and optimal
investment strategy.
28 Such designs are often subject to manipulations (e.g., Griﬃn and
Shams, 2020 ).
4.4.1. External ﬁnancing cost
The entrepreneur’s external ﬁnancing cost drives the
divergence of interest between the entrepreneur and users.
If the cost of buyback, χ, is zero, the dynamic token is-
suance cost and thus underinvestment disappear as shown
in Eq. (10) because −V M t = P t . 29 We now compare the
model’s performances under χ = 7% (the baseline value)
and χ = 8% .
In Panel A of Fig. 4 , we see that the entrepreneur’s
( A ′ -scaled) value function curve ends at a lower level of
m t when χ is higher. While the buyback (right) boundary
is lower, the payout (left) boundary remain roughly un-
changed. Therefore, the overall level of m t is lower when
χ increases. When the ﬁnancing cost is higher, the en-
trepreneur faces a higher cost of issuing tokens. Therefore,
the entrepreneur optimally maintains a low level of nor-
malized token supply. Panel A of Fig. 4 also shows that, in-
tuitively, a higher external ﬁnancing cost causes the value
function to shift downward across different values of m t .
We compare platform investment under different val-
ues of χ in Panel B of Fig. 4 . A higher ﬁnancing cost leads
to lower investment as the conﬂict of interest between the
entrepreneur and users is exacerbated. Following a positive
shock, the investment successfully enhances productivity,
beneﬁting both the entrepreneur and users; following a
negative shock, only the entrepreneur bears the downside
of a higher likelihood of paying the ﬁnancing cost for
token buyback because users are free to reduce token
holdings and abandon the platform. A higher ﬁnancing
cost implies a greater downside for the entrepreneur.
4.4.2. Network effect
As speciﬁed in Eq. (3) , the parameter γ governs the
strength of the network effect. When γ is higher, an
increase in the total number of users, N t , causes each
user to demand more tokens. In Fig. 5 , we compare the
entrepreneur’s value function (Panel A) and optimal in-
vestment (Panel B) under γ = 0 . 125 (the baseline value)
and γ = 0 . 124 .
Interestingly, a weaker network effect induces the
entrepreneur to be more aggressive in token issuance.
Moreover, the entrepreneur’s value function shifts upward
(Panel A), as a weaker network effect induces more invest-
ment (Panel B). These observations are counterintuitive
because when the network effect is weaker, the posi-
tive feedback effect of increasing productivity to attract
more and more users is dampened, which discourages
investment in productivity. However, our model features a
counteracting force.
As previously discussed, the conﬂict of interest between
the entrepreneur and users and the resultant underin-
vestment problem depend on three ingredients: (1) the
external ﬁnancing cost, (2) user heterogeneity, and (3)
the uncertainty in investment outcome. When investment
outcome is uncertain, the entrepreneur has to consider
the potential downside, i.e., the increase in the likelihood
29 In this case, the HJB equation of the owner’s valuation function de-
generates. Once the token price is solved via the ODE implied by the to-
ken market-clearing condition, the owner’s value function can be calcu-
lated as an integral of token price, because −V M t = −v ′ ( m t ) = P ( m t ) .
985

===== PAGE 15 =====

L.W. Cong, Y. Li and N. Wang Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 972–991
Fig. 4. Comparative statics: ﬁnancing cost. This ﬁgure shows the A ′ -scaled value function (Panel A) and optimal investment (Panel B) under χ = 0 . 08 and
the baseline value χ = 0 . 07 .
Fig. 5. Comparative statics: network effect. This ﬁgure shows the A ′ -scaled value function (Panel A) and optimal investment (Panel B) under γ = 0 . 124 and
the baseline value γ = 0 . 125 .
of costly token buyback follows a negative shock that
increases m t (by decreasing productivity in the denom-
inator). A weaker network effect dampens uncertainty.
Following a positive shock, investment increases produc-
tivity, but under a weaker network effect, the resultant
increase in token demand and the price is smaller. Like-
wise, following a negative shock, a weaker network effect
implies a smaller decline in token demand and price.
Therefore, even though a weaker network effect reduces
the average positive impact of investment on token price
and the entrepreneur’s payout (the mean effect), it also
dampens the risk of investment, which is a key ingredient
of the underinvestment problem.
5. Blockchain and investment eﬃciency
The entrepreneur faces a time inconsistency problem
that features prominently in studies on macroeconomics
(e.g., Kydland and Prescott, 1980; Barro and Gordon, 1983;
Lucas and Stokey, 1983 ) and corporate capital structure
(e.g., DeMarzo and He, 2021 ). If the entrepreneur is able
to commit against underinvestment, the users would have
demanded more tokens, which then increases the token
price, as well as the value of token payouts to the en-
trepreneur. However, a predetermined level of investment
can be deemed suboptimal ex post as the conﬂict of inter-
est arises between the entrepreneur and users, reﬂected
in the gap between the entrepreneur’s private valuation of
tokens, −V M t , and users’ valuation, P t .
So far, we have focused on the discretionary token-
supply policies of the platform. Next, we study how com-
mitment to predetermined token-supply rules adds value.
Our analysis provides insights on why tokens become a
viable payment solution after the blockchain technology
matures. The rise of tokens as a means of payment on
digital platforms is a recent phenomenon with many
applications inspired by the success of Bitcoin, Ethereum,
and other blockchain-based startups. In Appendix A, we
summarize the three aspects of blockchain technology
that are critical in enabling commitment, including data
structure, smart contracting, and decentralized governance,
and we highlight both the advantages of blockchain-based
commitment over traditional approaches (e.g., collateral)
and its limitations.
5.1. Constant token growth as commitment to investment
To illustrate the impact of commitment brought forth
by the blockchain technology, we consider a speciﬁc case
where:
d M t = F ( L t , A t ) /P t d t = μM M t d t, (34)
986

===== PAGE 16 =====

L.W. Cong, Y. Li and N. Wang Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 972–991
i.e., a constant growth rate of token supply in the interior
region ( dD t = 0 ) is used to ﬁnance the enhancement of
platform productivity. This commitment is popular among
blockchain applications primarily as a way to address
users’ concerns over token-holding dilution via inﬂation. 30
We show that the fundamental role of such commitment
actually lies in the mitigation of underinvestment. This
rule of token supply implies that the resources a platform
gathers, L t , become a predetermined function of the state
variables.
We still allow the entrepreneur to receive token div-
idends and buy back tokens, but with L t following a
predetermined rule, the entrepreneur’s only control vari-
able is dD t . The following HJB equation characterizes the
value function:
rV ( M t , A t ) dt = max
dD t
P t dD t
[
I { dD t ≥0 } + ( 1 + χ) I { dD t < 0 }
]
+ V M t
(μM M t dt + dD t
)
+ V A t A t L t μH dt +
1
2
V A t A t A 2
t L 2
t (σ H ) 2 dt. (35)
Comparing it with Eq. (9) , the tokens used to pay for L t is
replaced by μM M t dt. Under the same change of variable as
in Section 4.1 , we have, in the interior region ( dD t = 0 )
rv ( m t ) = v ′ ( m t )
(
L t + θ
2 L 2
t
)
P (m t )
+
[v ( m t ) − v ′ ( m t ) m t
]
×
[
δμH L t +
1
2
δ(δ −1)(σ H ) 2 L 2
t
]
+
1
2
v ′′ ( m t ) m 2
t δ2 (σ H ) 2 L 2
t , (36)
where L t , as a function of m t , is implicitly deﬁned by:
L t +
θ
2
L 2
t = μM P (m t ) m t . (37)
As the left-hand side of Eq. (37) is an increasing and
convex function of L t , investment increases in the A ′ -
scaled token market capitalization, i.e., P (m ) m = P t M t /A ′
t .
Intuitively, when tokens are more valuable, the constant
growth of token supply gathers more resources for devel-
opment. The boundary conditions are the same as those
of the baseline model.
Proposition 5 (Solution under Predetermined Token
Growth). Under the commitment to a constant growth rate
of token supply for investment in productivity, the investment
given by Eq. (37) increases in A ′ -scaled token market capital-
ization, i.e., P t m t . The entrepreneur receives token dividends
( dD ∗
t > 0 ) when P t ≥− V M t , and buys back and burns tokens
out of circulation ( dD ∗
t < 0 ) when −V M t ≥ P t ( 1 + χ) . Token
price is determined by Eq. (23) as in the baseline model.
In our numerical solution, we start with μM = 2 for
illustrative purpose. Comparing Panel A of Fig. 6 with
Panel A of Fig. 2 , we can see that the commitment in-
creases the entrepreneur’s value by around 15% near the
30 Blockchain applications emphasize predetermined rules of token-
supply growth. Ethereum has roughly ﬁxed increments while Bitcoin’s
minting rate is a constant that halves as the system matures via a longer
transaction chain (speciﬁcally, every 210,0 0 0 more blocks).
payout (lower) boundary and around 20% near the buy-
back (upper) boundary. By comparing Panel B in the two
ﬁgures, we see that such an increase mainly comes from
a higher level of investment as the commitment mitigates
the problem of underinvestment under token overhang.
As previously discussed, to the entrepreneur, the value
of tokens is −V M t , while to the users, it is P t . The wedge
between −V M t and P t widens as the normalized token sup-
ply, m t , increases, and the ratio, −V M t /P t , reaches 1 + χ,
the ﬁnancing cost of token buyback, at the buyback (up-
per) boundary of m t . Therefore, as shown in Eq. (10) , the
closer to the buyback boundary, the more concerned the
entrepreneur is over the token issuance cost, −V M t /P t > 1 .
This implies that investment chosen by the entrepreneur
declines in m t , as shown in Panel B of Fig. 2 . Therefore,
commitment to the predetermined investment rule creates
more value when m t is higher and closer to its upper
boundary. This explains why the commitment-induced
improvement in the entrepreneur’s value is greater near
the buyback boundary (around 20% increase) than near
the payout boundary (around 15% increase).
Another difference between the commitment case
and the baseline case of discretionary investment is that
under commitment, investment increases in m t (Panel B of
Fig. 6 ), while in the baseline case, investment decreases in
m t (Panel B of Fig. 2 ). As previously discussed, the declin-
ing pattern in the baseline case is due to the increasing
cost of issuing tokens, i.e., the widening wedge between
−V M t and P t . The increasing pattern in the commitment
case is a numeric result. As m t increases, token price,
P (m t ) , decreases, but the A ′
t -scaled market capitalization,
i.e., P (m t ) m t , may increase or decrease. Under the cur-
rent parameterization, the P (m t ) m t increases in m t , so,
according to Eq. (37) , L t increases in m t .
To further demonstrate the economic mechanism, we
also consider the solution when the committed growth of
token supply is half as large, i.e., μM = 1 . The impact of
reducing token-supply growth rate on investment and the
entrepreneur’s value is unclear a priori. By reducing inﬂa-
tion, a lower growth rate of token supply tends to increase
the token price that users are willing to pay and thus in-
crease L t , the resources gathered via token issuance. How-
ever, as shown in Eq. (37) , L t depends on the token market
capitalization, i.e., both the unit price and the quantity
of tokens, so reducing the token-supply growth can also
negatively impact L t . Under the current parameterization,
the latter force dominates, which leads to a lower level of
investment under μM = 1 (Panel D of Fig. 6 ) than the so-
lution under μM = 2 (Panel B of Fig. 6 ). Comparing Panels
A and C of Fig. 6 , we can see that the entrepreneur’s value
also declines when μM declines from 2 to 1.
What is more interesting is that the entrepreneur’s
value near the payout (lower) boundary of m t is not only
below the value under μM = 2 but also around 2% below
the value in the baseline case of discretionary investment
(Panel A of Fig. 2 ). As previously discussed, the wedge
between the entrepreneur’s private cost of token issuance,
−V M t , and users’ valuation, P t , widens as m t increases, so
commitment adds more value when m t is higher. Indeed,
the entrepreneur’s value is around 3% higher under μM = 1
than in the discretionary case near the buyback (upper)
987

===== PAGE 17 =====

L.W. Cong, Y. Li and N. Wang Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 972–991
Fig. 6. Platform value and investment under predetermined token-supply growth. In Panels A and C, we plot the A ′
t -scaled value functions under μM = 2
and μM = 1 , respectively. In Panel B and D, we plot the optimal investment under μM = 2 and μM = 1 , respectively.
boundary. In contrast, commitment adds less value in
the low- m t region, i.e., near the payout (lower) boundary,
because the conﬂict of interest between the entrepreneur
and users is less severe. Therefore, near m , the value
added from commitment is small while the drawback of
commitment—the entrepreneur cannot coordinate invest-
ment ( L t ) and payout/buyback ( dD t ) decisions—dominates.
As a result, the entrepreneur’s value actually decreases
under commitment relative to the discretionary case.
Regarding the coordination between investment and
payout/buyback decisions, its importance can be seen from
the difference in the range of m t on the horizontal axis
between commitment cases ( Fig. 6 ) and the baseline case
( Figs. 2 and 3 ). Under commitment, the range is much
smaller. The entrepreneur pays the ﬁnancing cost to buy
back and burn tokens at a much lower level of m t (i.e.,
chooses a lower buyback boundary). Moreover, the payout
boundaries under commitment (both μM = 1 and μM = 2 )
are higher than that of the discretionary case. Therefore,
when the entrepreneur loses control of the amount of
tokens issued for investment, she turns more active in
payout and buyback, effectively narrowing the equilibrium
range of m t . This results in more frequent payments of the
ﬁnancing cost.
To sum up, commitment to predetermined investment
rules adds value by addressing the token overhang prob-
lem, but it also forces the entrepreneur to control the
token supply more actively via the remaining margins (i.e.,
payout and buyback), and to pay the ﬁnancing cost more
frequently. Overall, when the former force dominates, the
entrepreneur obtains a higher value via commitment: A
higher level of investment translates into a higher token
price through users’ expectations of faster productivity
growth, and a higher token price in turn implies a more
valuable token payout for the entrepreneur.
5.2. Mitigating underinvestment through fees
As demonstrated, commitment enabled by blockchains
mitigates the problem of token-overhang and underin-
vestment, but commitment to predetermined investment
rules forces the entrepreneur to manage the token supply
through more active payout and buyback, which results
in paying ﬁnancing costs more frequently. An alternative
solution is to ﬁnance investment with fees collected from
users.
To analyze the impact of fees, let f 0 ,t and f 1 ,t denote
respectively the ﬁxed and proportional fees users pay at t.
The users’ objective Eq. (6) is modiﬁed to:
max
{
0 , max
k i,t > 0
[
( P t k i,t )
1 −α (
N γ
t A t u i
)α
d t + k i,t E t [ d P t ]
−(φ + f t, 0 ) dt − P t k i,t (r + f 1 ,t ) dt ] } . (38)
Under the parameterized distribution of u i , we follow the
same procedure to solve the participation threshold and
988

===== PAGE 18 =====

L.W. Cong, Y. Li and N. Wang Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 972–991
Fig. 7. Platform value, investment, and token price dynamics under fees. In Panel A, B, C, and D, we compare, respectively, the entrepreneur’s A ′
t -scaled
value function, optimal investment, the P t -scaled token-price drift, and the P t -scaled token-price diffusion under fees and in the baseline case without fees.
then obtain a new measure of users:
N t = A ′
t
( α
ω(φ + f 0 ,t )
) ξ
1 −ξγ
(
1 − α
r + f 1 ,t − μP (m t )
)
(
ξ
1 −ξγ
)
(
1 −α
α )
≡ A ′
t n ( f 0 ,t , f 1 ,t , m t ) . (39)
It is clear that ∂n ( f 0 ,t , f 1 ,t ,m t )
∂ f 0 ,t < 0 and ∂n ( f 0 ,t , f 1 ,t ,m t )
∂ f 1 ,t < 0 (as
α ∈ (0 , 1) and ξ ∈ ( 1 , 1 /γ] ). The platform faces a trade-
off. Higher fees, either via f 0 ,t or f 1 ,t , lead to lower user
participation, which directly reduces the revenue from
ﬁxed fees, i.e., f 0 ,t N t . 31
Meanwhile, higher fees also reduce users’ token de-
mand, which leads to a lower token price and proportional
fees. We follow the same procedure of solving users’ token
demand, k i,t , and then from the token market-clearing
condition, we obtain:
P ( f 0 ,t , f 1 ,t , m t ) =
ξ
m t (ξ −1) ω
ξ
1 −ξγ
( α
φ + f 0 ,t
) ξ
1 −ξγ −1
×
(
1 − α
r + f 1 ,t − μP (m t )
)1+
(
ξ
1 −ξγ
)
(
1 −α
α )
.
(40)
31 Note that the users’ expectations of the rate of token price change,
μP (m t ) , is a function of the key state variable m t , which the platform
takes as given when choosing its fees.
We have ∂P( f 0 ,t , f 1 ,t ,m t )
∂ f 0 ,t < 0 and ∂P( f 0 ,t , f 1 ,t ,m t )
∂ f 1 ,t < 0 (as
ξ
1 −ξγ −1 > 0 under ξγ < 1 ), so the token price is
negatively affected by the platform imposing fees on users.
Overall, when choosing fees, the entrepreneur solves
a problem akin to a monopolistic producer, trading off
unit prices and quantities. The total fee revenues are equal
to f 0 ,t N t + f 1 ,t P t M t , where we apply the token market-
clearing condition,
∫
i ∈ [ 0 ,1 ] k i,t di = M t , to substitute out
k i,t . Such revenues can be used to ﬁnance investment in
productivity so that the need to issue tokens is reduced.
The new law of motion of token supply is thus given by:
d M t =
F ( L t , A t ) − ( f 0 ,t N t + f 1 ,t P t M t )
P t
d t + d D t , (41)
and in the interior region where dD t = 0 , the platform’s
HJB Eq. (9) becomes:
rV ( M t , A t ) dt = max
{ f 0 ,t , f 1 ,t ,L t ,dD t }
× V M t
[
F ( L t , A t ) − ( f 0 ,t N t + f 1 ,t P t M t )
P t
dt
]
+ V A t A t L t μH dt +
1
2
V A t A t A 2
t L 2
t (σ H ) 2 dt . (42)
Under a negative marginal value of outstanding token
supply, i.e., V M t < 0 , the entrepreneur chooses fees to
minimize the expression in the square bracket on the
right-hand side of Eq. (42) . Allowing the platform to
charge fees provides an additional source of revenue that
989

===== PAGE 19 =====

L.W. Cong, Y. Li and N. Wang Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 972–991
likely increases investment and the entrepreneur’s value,
especially when the likelihood of costly token buyback is
high near the upper (buyback) boundary of m t .
Introducing fees entails costs and beneﬁts that are
associated with traditional platform businesses. There are
many studies on the complex economic forces that drive
the determination of fees on platforms (e.g., Hagiu, 2006;
Rochet and Tirole, 2006; Rysman, 2009 ). Given our focus
on tokens, our setup does not capture all those forces.
Therefore, we do not address the question of optimal
fee setting. Instead, we illustrate the impact of fees in
Fig. 7 using a particular fee structure, f 0 ,t = 0 . 1% and
f 1 ,t = 0 . 1% . 32 The fee revenue, f 0 ,t N t + f 1 ,t P t M t , varies
endogenously in the model, along with the user base, N t ,
the token price, P t , and the outstanding token amount, M t .
The constant fee parameters allow us to remain as close
as possible to the baseline model and its solution method.
The dashed line in Panel A of Fig. 7 shows that fees
increase the platform owner’s value especially near the
buyback (upper) boundary of m t . As previously discussed,
near the upper boundary, the token issuance cost is high,
so the platform refrains from token-ﬁnanced investment.
This underinvestment problem is now mitigated by fee
revenues (Panel B of Fig. 7 ). Introducing fees does not
signiﬁcantly affect the dynamics of the token price (Panels
C and D of Fig. 7 ) in terms of the drift and diffusion.
A notable difference between our main model and the
model with fees is that under fees, the entrepreneur
delays costly token buyback, which is reﬂected in a higher
upper boundary of m t (Panel D of Fig. 7 ). This additional
ﬁnancial slack also helps to boost the entrepreneur’s value.
Overall, fees increase the entrepreneur’s value by both
alleviating the underinvestment problem and allowing the
platform to reduce the impact of ﬁnancing costs by post-
poning token buybacks. Our analysis thus points towards
an interesting direction for future research: Analogous
to macroeconomic management through monetary and
ﬁscal policies, a platform may dynamically manage its
state-contingent token-supply policy and fee structure.
6. Conclusion
We develop a dynamic model of a platform econ-
omy, where tokens are used as a means of payment
among users and issued to ﬁnance platform operation and
growth. Tokens facilitate user transactions and compensate
distributed ledger-keepers, open-source developers, and
crowdfunders for their contributions to platform devel-
opment. The platform owners maximize their seigniorage
by managing token supply, subject to the conditions that
users optimally decide on token demand and rationally
form expectations of token price dynamics.
We characterize the optimal token-supply strategy and
its implications for user-base dynamics, endogenous plat-
32 When fees are set by centralized platform owners, they are
relatively stable, as we see in IBM Blockchain’s ﬂat fee for IBM
Cloud, for example, see https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/blockchain?topic=
blockchain- ibp- saas- pricing . Fee setting on permissionless, decentral-
ized platforms has traditionally been linked to network congestion
and service capacity, which are outside our model but discussed in
Basu et al. (2019) and Cong et al. (2021) .
form growth, and token price dynamics. A key mechanism
is the wedge between insiders’ (the platform owners’)
token valuation and that of outsiders (users). When the
valuation wedge falls to zero, the platform owners op-
timally receives token dividends; when it rises to an
endogenously determined threshold, the platform opti-
mally burns tokens out of circulation to stabilize the token
value. The wedge creates underinvestment in platform
productivity under the ﬁnancing cost of token buyback.
By enabling commitment, blockchains enable rule-
based token supply, thereby mitigating underinvestment
by overcoming the platform owners’ time inconsistency.
Financing investment with fees charged on users reduces
the investment ineﬃciency at the expense of user par-
ticipation and token demand. Beyond the main focus on
token-ﬁnanced platform development, our paper provides
broad implications of dynamic token allocation for token
price, user adoption, stablecoins, among other issues.
Supplementary material
Supplementary material associated with this
article can be found, in the online version, at
doi: 10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2021.10.002 .
References
Abadi, J. , Brunnermeier, M. , 2018. Blockchain Economics. Technical Report.
National Bureau of Economic Research .
Barro, R.J., Gordon, D.B., 1983. A positive theory of monetary policy in
a natural rate model. J. Polit. Economy 91 (4), 589–610. doi: 10.1086/
261167 .
Basu, S. , Easley, D. , O’Hara, M. , Sirer, E. , 2019. Towards a Functional Fee
Market for Cryptocurrencies. Available at SSRN 3318327 .
Biais, B. , Bisiere, C. , Bouvard, M. , Casamatta, C. , 2019. The blockchain folk
theorem. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (5), 1662–1715 .
Bolton, P., Chen, H., Wang, N., 2011. A uniﬁed theory of tobin’s q, corporate
investment, ﬁnancing, and risk management. J. Finance 66 (5), 1545–
1578. http://www.jstor.org/stable/41305169
Bolton, P. , Huang, H. , 2017. The capital structure of nations. Rev. Financ.
22 (1), 45–82 .
Brunnermeier, M.K. , James, H. , Landau, J.-P. , 2019. The Digitalization of
Money. Technical Report. Princeton University .
Brunnermeier, M.K. , Sannikov, Y. , 2016. The I Theory of Money. Working
paper. Princeton University .
Bulow, J.I. , 1982. Durable-goods monopolists. J. Polit. Economy 90 (2),
314–332 .
Cagan, P.D. , 1956. The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinﬂation. University of
Chicago Press .
Canidio, A. , 2018. Financial Incentives for Open Source Development: The
Case of Blockchain. Working paper. IMT School of Advanced Studies .
Chen, L. , Cong, L.W. , Xiao, Y. , 2020. A Brief Introduction to Blockchain Eco-
nomics, pp. 1–40 . Chapter 1
Chiu, J. , Koeppl, T.V. , 2017. The Economics of Cryptocurrencies – Bitcoin
and Beyond .
Chiu, J. , Wong, T.-N. , 2015. On the Essentiality of E-money. Technical Re-
port. Bank of Canada Staff Working Paper .
Chod, J. , Lyandres, E. , 2018. A Theory of ICOs: diversiﬁcation, Agency, and
Asymmetric Information. Working paper. Boston University Questrom
School of Business .
Coase, R.H., 1972. Durability and monopoly. J. Law Econ. 15 (1), 143–149.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/725018
Cong, L.W. , He, Z. , 2019. Blockchain disruption and smart contracts. Rev.
Financ. Stud. 32 (5), 1754–1797 .
Cong, L.W., Li, Y., Wang, N., 2021. Tokenomics: dynamic adoption and val-
uation. Rev. Financ. Stud. 34 (3), 1105–1155. doi: 10.1093/rfs/hhaa089 .
Décamps, J.-P., Gryglewicz, S., Morellec, E., Villeneuve, S., 2016. Corporate
policies with permanent and transitory shocks. Rev. Financ. Stud. 30
(1), 162–210. doi: 10.1093/rfs/hhw078 .
DeMarzo, P.M. , He, Z. , 2021. Leverage dynamics without commitment. J.
Finance 76 (3), 1195–1250 .
990

===== PAGE 20 =====

L.W. Cong, Y. Li and N. Wang Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2022) 972–991
Duﬃe, D. , 2019. Digital Currencies and Fast Payment Systems: Disrup-
tion is Coming. Working paper. Stanford University Graduate School
of Business .
Easley, D. , O’Hara, M. , Basu, S. , 2019. From mining to markets: the evolu-
tion of bitcoin transaction fees. J. Financ. Econ. 134 (1), 91–109 .
Eckbo, B.E. , Masulis, R.W. , Norli, O. , 2007. Chapter 6 –s e c u r i t y offer-
ings. In: Eckbo, B.E. (Ed.), Handbook of Corporate Finance: Empiri-
cal Corporate Finance . In: Handbook of Finance Series , vol. 1. Else-
vier/North-Holland, pp. 233–373 .
Fanti, G. , Kogan, L. , Viswanath, P. , 2019. Economics of Proof-of-Stake Pay-
ment Systems. Working paper .
Fischer, S., 1980. Dynamic inconsistency, cooperation and the benevolent
dissembling government. J. Econ. Dyn. Control 2, 93–107. doi: 10.1016/
0165- 1889(80)90053- 6 .
Garratt, R. , Van Oordt, M.R. , 2019. Entrepreneurial Incentives and the Role
of Initial Coin Offerings. Working paper. University of California at
Santa Barbara and Bank of Canada .
Goldstein, I. , Gupta, D. , Sverchkov, R. , 2019. Initial Coin Offerings as a
Commitment to Competition. Available at SSRN 3484627 .
Griﬃn, J.M. , Shams, A. , 2020. Is bitcoin really untethered? J. Finance 75
(4), 1913–1964 .
Gryglewicz, S. , Mayer, S. , Morellec, E. , 2020. Optimal Financing with To-
kens. Working Paper. EPFL, Erasmus University Rotterdam, and Swiss
Finance Institute .
Hagiu, A., 2006. Pricing and commitment by two-sided platforms. Rand J.
Econ. 37 (3), 720–737. doi: 10.1111/j.1756-2171.20 06.tb0 0 039.x .
Hayashi, F. , 1982. Tobin’s marginal q and average q: a neoclassical inter-
pretation. Econometrica 213–224 .
Hinzen, F.J. , John, K. , Saleh, F. , 2019. Bitcoin’s Fatal Flaw: The Limited
Adoption Problem. NYU Stern School of Business .
Hu, A. , Parlour, C. , Rajan, U. , 2018. Cryptocurrencies: Stylized Facts on
a New Investible Instrument. Working Paper. University of California
Berkeley and University of Michigan .
Huberman, G., Leshno, J. D., Moallemi, C. C., 2019. An economic analysis
of the Bitcoin payment system.
Hugonnier, J. , Malamud, S. , Morellec, E. , 2015. Capital supply uncertainty,
cash holdings, and investment. Rev. Financ. Stud. 28 (2), 391–445 .
Irresberger, F. , John, K. , Saleh, F. , 2019. The Public Blockchain Ecosystem:
An Empirical analysis. NYU Stern School of Business .
Kahn, C., 1986. The durable goods monopolist and consistency with in-
creasing costs. Econometrica 54 (2), 275–294. http://www.jstor.org/
stable/1913151
Kydland, F.E., Prescott, E.C., 1980. Dynamic optimal taxation, rational ex-
pectations and optimal control. J. Econ. Dyn. Control 2, 79–91. doi: 10.
1016/0165- 1889(80)90052- 4 .
Lehar, A. , Parlour, C.A. , 2020. Miner Collusion and the BitCoin Proto-
col. Working Paper. University of Calgary and University of California
Berkeley .
Li, Y. , 2017. Procyclical Finance: The Money View. Dice Center Working
Paper. The Ohio State University Fisher College of Business .
Li, Y. , Mayer, S. , 2020. Managing Stablecoins: Optimal Strategies, Regula-
tion, and Transaction Data as Productive Capital. Dice Center Working
Paper. The Ohio State University Fisher College of Business .
Liu, Y. , Tsyvinski, A. , 2021. Risks and returns of cryptocurrency. Rev. Fi-
nanc. Stud. 34 (6), 2689–2727 .
Ljungqvist, L. , Sargent, T.J. , 2018. Recursive Macroeconomic Theory. MIT
press .
Lucas, R.E., Stokey, N.L., 1983. Optimal ﬁscal and monetary policy in an
economy without capital. J. Monet. Econ. 12 (1), 55–93. doi: 10.1016/
0304-3932(83)90049-1 .
Mayer, S. , 2020. Token-Based Platforms and Speculators. Working Paper.
Erasmus University Rotterdam .
Michaels, D. , 2019. U.S. regulators sue crypto startup telegram over initial
coin offering. Wall Street J. October 11 .
Pagnotta, E. , 2018. Bitcoin as decentralized money: prices, mining re-
wards, and network security. Min. Rewards Netw. Secur. .
Rochet, J.-C. , Tirole, J. , 2003. Platform competition in two-sided markets.
J. Eur. Econ. Assoc. 1 (4), 990–1029 .
Rochet, J.-C., Tirole, J., 2006. Two-sided markets: a progress report. Rand
J. Econ. 37 (3), 645–667. http://www.jstor.org/stable/25046265
Romer, P.M., 1986. Increasing returns and long-run growth. J. Polit. Econ-
omy 94 (5), 1002–1037. doi: 10.1086/261420 .
Rysman, M., 2009. The economics of two-sided markets. J. Econ. Perspect.
23 (3), 125–143. doi: 10.1257/jep.23.3.125 .
Saleh, F. , 2018. Volatility and Welfare in a Crypto Economy. Available at
SSRN 3235467 .
Sockin, M. , Xiong, W. , 2018. A Model of Cryptocurrencies. Working Paper .
Stokey, N.L. , 1981. Rational expectations and durable goods pricing. Bell J.
Econ. 112–128 .
Stulz, R.M. , 2019. FinTech, BigTech, and the Future of Banks. Dice Center
Working Paper. OSU Fisher College of Business .
991