

===== PAGE 1 =====

Revision of “Financing Breakthroughs under Failure Risk” (#2021-0422)
Reply to the Referee
Thank you very much for your feedback and constructive comments on the paper.
I have revised the paper to take into account your comments as well as those of the
editor and the other referee. Below, I provide a detailed response to your comments and
suggestions (repeated in italics). To ease the revision, I follow the structure of the referee
report and adopt the proposed comment categories — Conceptual Comments, Technical
Comments, and Other Comments. For convenience, I have also numbered the comments
in the order they appear in your report.
Conceptual Comments
1. Contribution. The model is simple and elegant. The result that the agent must be
rewarded for disclosing bad news when this information is valuable for the principal is not
new and present in, e.g., Levitt and Snyder (1997), Eisfeldt and Rampini (2008) and In-
derst and Mueller (2010). For example, in Eisfeldt and Rampini (2008), an unproductive
manager needs to be compensated to declare that capital should be reallocated because of
private beneﬁts of control, which is also the mechanism in this paper. It is also expected
that if eliciting information is too expensive to the principal relative to the beneﬁt of this
information, then a pooling contract would be optimal, so sometimes it is better to not
reward the agent for disclosing bad news because it is too expensive. Given these results,
the main contribution of this paper is in embedding this intuition into a dynamic model,
in which disclosure today is linked to disclosure tomorrow via the continuation utility of
the agent, and so the cost and the beneﬁt of disclosure are endogenous with respect to what
will happen tomorrow. This is a nice and relevant contribution, but I think the paper could
make a stronger case that the results it delivers, ﬁrst, explain some empirical patterns in
the ﬁnancing of innovation that other models could not explain (or alternatively, provide
a diﬀerent explanation of the phenomenon that other models speak to), and second, are
robust to reasonable variations in the economic environment modeled.
1
Supplementary Material

===== PAGE 2 =====

Thank you very much for your comments. In the revised version, I have done several
changes to address your comments. First, I have included a paragraph in the introduction
to diﬀerentiate my paper’s contribution from the static contracting literature (and the ref-
erences you have mentioned). On page 6 in the introduction, I write “The core mechanism
leading to rewards for failure, namely to incentivize disclosure of bad outcomes, arises in
a similar form in prior work on static principal-agent problems (Levitt and Snyder, 1997;
Eisfeldt and Rampini, 2008; Inderst and Mueller, 2010). The contribution of our paper is
to study incentive provision for disclosure of bad outcomes in a dynamic environment so
that the agent’s disclosure incentives are linked across periods and therefore endogenously
depend on what will happen in the future. As such, our analysis yields the novel implica-
tions that to incentivize truthful disclosure, the rewards for disclosing bad outcomes must
decrease over time and it is not optimal to incentivize disclosure of bad outcomes in the
early contract stages.”
Second, I have revised Section 3 discussing empirical implications and model predic-
tions as well as the corresponding paragraphs in the introduction. In the revised paper
version, I discuss the model implications for venture capital ﬁnancing — which is the
main application of my model — in Section 3.1 (page 23), while Section 3.2 (page 26)
discusses other model applications, such as R&D ﬁnancing or executive compensation.
Importantly, as I discuss in response to your next point on the model’s empirical impli-
cations (comment 2 in the referee report) in greater detail, I have derived and included
several model implications that have not been there in the previous paper version, and
I connect these implications to empirical studies on VC ﬁnancing. I have changed the
corresponding paragraphs in the introduction too. In addition, I have incorporated your
feedback on how to improve existing model implications and to sharpen their connection
to empirical studies.
Third, I have expanded Section 5 discussing the robustness of my model. As I describe
in more detail in response to your comment 3 (on discounting and time-decreasing rewards
for failure), in Appendix C.2 on page 65, I solve now the model with discounting, and
I show that the model results remain (qualitatively) unchanged under this alternative
speciﬁcation. Furthermore, I also show that the model results remain similar the same
when the agent aﬀects the completion timing (Appendix C.3 on page 70), when the agent
2

===== PAGE 3 =====

can hide success (Appendix C.4 on page 70), or when eﬀort is continuous (i.e., non-
binary) with convex costs of eﬀort (Appendix C.5 on page 72). These model extensions
are discussed in Section 5.2 “Robustness” on page 36.
2. Empirical relevance. The paper discusses many implications, which is appreciated, but I
found these discussions unfocused and imprecise. Speciﬁc examples from the introduction:
(a) “The unconditional ﬁnancing stage can also be interpreted as contractual grace or
probationary period during which the agent is not ﬁred after bad outcomes” - but
this is not quite true, because in the optimal contract the agent is ﬁred after a bad
outcome if it is veriﬁable.
(b) “The model predicts that optimal venture capital contracts involve distinct ﬁnancing
stages, whereby the continuation of ﬁnancing becomes more performance-sensitive
over time and the entrepreneur’s incentives and liquidation rights in the startup
... are backloaded.” - but can we actually call the entrepreneur’s liquidation rights
back-loaded when under the optimal contract they are non-monotone over time (zero
initially, then jump up and decrease)? The same comment applies to “Optimal
contracts for R &D workers stipulate backloaded incentives and tolerance towards
failure”
(c) “optimal ﬁnancing contracts for projects that are subject to severe agency con-
ﬂicts involve a relatively long unconditional ﬁnancing stage ... . That is, precisely
when agency conﬂicts in project development are severe ..., it is optimal to provide
substantial unconditional ﬁnancing that is independent of performance or reported
progress” - where is this result shown in the paper? I did not see results about the
comparative statics oft1 inφ. Is there any evidence that there is less staged ﬁnancing
in startups/industries that are more prone to agency conﬂicts?
(d) “the model highlights the tension that while instruments like golden handshakes,
golden parachutes, and severance pay provide incentives for truth- 4 full disclosure
of bad outcomes, they also undermine incentives to generate good outcomes” - but
this tension is not speciﬁc to this model and also present in, e.g., Levitt and Snyder
(1997).
3

===== PAGE 4 =====

(f) “the optimal ﬁnancing contract for projects that generate results quickly stipulates
substantial unconditional ﬁnancing but a (relatively) short hard deadline, which is
broadly consistent with a “spray and pray” investment approach” - If I understand
it correctly, the “spray and pray” investment approach is to ﬁnance a large number
of small risky ventures, as opposed to a moderate number of larger and less risky
ventures, and less about the provision of unconditional vs. conditional ﬁnancing.
I think the paper would beneﬁt from a more focused, even if less ambitious, discussion. I
suggest that the authors ﬁnd one or two key empirical patterns that the model uniquely
speaks to, show what formal results in the paper these implications exactly come from,
and discuss if other existing models can or cannot speak to the same empirical patterns.
For example, is there any evidence, even anecdotal, that venture capitalists do not elicit
soft information from entrepreneurs early on but do later on? Or is there any evidence
that the liquidation preference of entrepreneurs is time-decreasing when the liquidation is
chosen voluntarily by the entrepreneur?
Thank you very much for your comments and constructive feedback. I have done
several things to address your comments. First, I have revised Section 3 discussing model
applications and implications. Because venture capital (VC) ﬁnancing is the model’s
main application, Section 3.1 (which starts page on 23) discusses now model implications
speciﬁc to VC ﬁnancing, while Section 3.2 (which starts on page 26) discusses other model
applications, such as executive compensation and R&D ﬁnancing. I have also revised the
corresponding paragraphs in the introduction accordingly. The model implications for
VC ﬁnancing are now discussed in the introduction, starting from the bottom of page 2.
I would like to highlight selected model implications which Section 3.1 and the intro-
duction discuss in greater detail:
• I am very grateful for your suggestion to investigate whether there is some evidence
that VCs do not elicit soft information and/or disclosure of failure in the early
ﬁnancing stages. Indeed, the model predicts that in the early ﬁnancing stages, VCs
tend not to incentivize disclosure of failure, consistent with the ﬁndings in Puri and
Zarutskie (2012). Puri and Zarutskie (2012) ﬁnd that especially in the early stages
(years) of ﬁnancing, VC ﬁnanced startup ﬁrms are less likely to declare failure
4

===== PAGE 5 =====

than comparable non VC-ﬁnanced ﬁrms (whereas any diﬀerences in failure rates
between VC-ﬁnanced and non-VC ﬁnanced ﬁrms taper oﬀ in subsequent years). I
mention this ﬁnding in the introduction on page 3 where I write “According to
our model, the provision (continuation) of ﬁnancing becomes more performance-
sensitive over time and across stages. Speciﬁcally, optimal VC contracts feature an
initial unconditional ﬁnancing stage during which the VC does not elicit disclosure
of failure or, more broadly, soft information. This initial unconditional ﬁnancing
period implies a relatively low likelihood that a VC-ﬁnanced startup declares failure
and is terminated in the early stages/years of ﬁnancing, in line with the empirical
ﬁndings of Puri and Zarutskie (2012).”
The corresponding discussion in the main text is on page 23 where I write “Ac-
cording to our model, optimal VC ﬁnancing contracts do not elicit disclosure of
failure or, more broadly, soft information in the early ﬁnancing stages. Related,
the provision (continuation) of ﬁnancing by the VC becomes more performance-
sensitive over time and across stages. In the data, we do not observe a startup’s
actual failure date but only the date on which the startup “declares failure” (i.e.,
is sold/liquidated/shut down). As a result, we should — all else equal — observe
in the data relatively low failure rates for VC-ﬁnanced startup ﬁrms in the early
years of ﬁnancing. Consistent with our ﬁndings, Puri and Zarutskie (2012) ﬁnd that
especially in the early stages (years) of ﬁnancing, VC-ﬁnanced ﬁrms are less likely
to declare failure than comparable non VC-ﬁnanced ﬁrms (whereas any diﬀerences
in failure rates between VC-ﬁnanced and non-VC ﬁnanced ﬁrms taper oﬀ in subse-
quent years). Our analysis suggests that the reason underlying this outcome is that
in the early stages/years of ﬁnancing, VCs tend to elicit disclosure of failure and
soft information less than non VC investors.”
The same paragraph and the following paragraph below (i.e., the last paragraph of
page 23) provide then additional details on how my paper’s implications relate to
the empirical results in Puri and Zarutskie (2012).
• In practice, failure could represent any type of exit that yields relatively low payoﬀs,
such as liquidation or sale/acquisition of the startup yielding low payoﬀ. The model
5

===== PAGE 6 =====

prediction that there are no rewards for failure in the early ﬁnancing stages but
only in the later ﬁnancing stages is consistent with the ﬁndings of Kaplan and
Str¨ omberg (2003). To refer to this result, I write on page 3 of the introduction
“Importantly, the entrepreneur should be compensated for failure (i.e., liquidation
or an acquisition/sale of the startup that leads to relatively low payoﬀ) only in the
later ﬁnancing stages. Kaplan and Str¨ omberg (2003) Kaplan and Str¨ omberg (2003)
indeed document that in the later ﬁnancing stages, the founder is more likely to
have liquidation rights or claims that are senior/par to VC cumulative investment.”
The corresponding discussion in the main text can be found on the top of page 25:
“In practice, any exit that generates relatively low payoﬀs could be interpreted as
failure, such as the liquidation, sale, or “low acquisition” of the startup. 1 Rewards
for failure could be implemented by granting the entrepreneur liquidation rights or
claims that are senior or par to the VC’s cumulative investment. According to our
model, such rewards for failure are more common in the later stages of VC ﬁnancing,
consistent with the empirical ﬁndings of Kaplan and Str¨ omberg (2003).2”
• The model also predicts that once in place, rewards for failure decrease over time. I
discuss the empirical implications of this result in the introduction on page 3 where
I write “Then, in the later ﬁnancing stages, these rewards for failure decrease over
time, which could be a consequence of staged ﬁnancing. With staged ﬁnancing, the
startup undergoes several ﬁnancing rounds that repeatedly dilute the entrepreneur’s
stake in the startup, thereby reducing her rewards for failure (and success) over time.
In addition, as rewards for failure decrease over time, the VC’s residual payoﬀ upon
1For instance, Ewens et al. (2020) classify an exit as “low acquisition” when the startup has a reported
acquisition value less than 1.5x capital invested (see Figure A1). Similarly, Ewens et al. (2021) classify
only acquisition with value of more than 2x capital investment as success. Pushing this idea further,
one can interpret publicly observed failure as a “bad” outcome/exit, such as bankruptcy or liquidation,
and privately observed failure as an “intermediate” outcome/exit, such as a low acquisition or sale of the
startup. The idea behind this interpretation is that “good” and “bad” outcomes (i.e., success and failure)
are observable and veriﬁable for outside investors, but intermediate outcomes are not and it is hard to
incentivize disclosure of these intermediate outcomes. I would like to thank Neng Wang for suggesting
this interpretation.
2In particular, Kaplan and Str¨ omberg (2003) report in Table 4 that non-VC liquidation rights senior
or par to VC cumulative investment and founder claims senior or par to VC cumulative investment
are signiﬁcantly more common in later ﬁnancing round than in the ﬁrst ﬁnancing round. Also, Kaplan
and Str¨ omberg (2003) ﬁnd that after (relatively) good performance — in terms of our model, when the
startup does not fail — the entrepreneur retains/obtains more control rights and the VC may relinquish
liquidation rights.
6

===== PAGE 7 =====

failure and so the VC’s downside protection increases over time, in line with the
ﬁndings of (Bengtsson and Sensoy, 2011).”
The corresponding discussion in the main text can be found on pages 25 and 26
where I write “Importantly, our model predicts that in the later stages of VC ﬁ-
nancing, the agent receives time-decreasing rewards for failure and success. Recall
that rewards for failure decrease over time to incentivize the agent not to delay
disclosure of failure. In practice, the entrepreneur’s time-decreasing payoﬀs (for
both failure and success) could be a consequence of the repeated dilution of the
entrepreneur’s stake in the startup when the startup holds a new ﬁnancing round
to raise funds (which requires investors to grant a stake in the startup). This mech-
anism is similar to the dilution of early startup investors in later ﬁnancing rounds
(Bengtsson and Sensoy, 2015). The fact that VC ﬁnancing is provided in several
stages and ﬁnancing rounds implies the gradual dilution of the entrepreneur’s stake
and so can induce time-decreasing rewards for failure in the later ﬁnancing stages.
Hence, we conclude that staged ﬁnancing endows the entrepreneur with incentives
not to delay disclosure of failure and, more broadly, to choose the optimal exit
timing. Observe that ceteris paribus, failure rewards for the entrepreneur decrease
the residual payoﬀ upon failure that is left for the VC; thus, rewards for failure
(for the entrepreneur) are likely to correlate negatively with investor downside pro-
tection. Notably, Bengtsson and Sensoy (2011) document a signiﬁcantly positive
relationship between VC downside protection (which can be seen as the inverse of
the entrepreneur’s rewards for failure) and startup age. According to our ﬁndings,
this relationship could reﬂect that in the later ﬁnancing stages, the entrepreneur’s
rewards for failure decrease and therefore VC downside protection increases over
time.”
• I also derive empirical implications based on the comparative statics presented in
Figure 3 (page 29) which shows that the relative length of the unconditional ﬁnanc-
ing stage t1/T increases with φ. I relate this ﬁnding to empirical evidence on the
bottom of page 3 in the introduction where I write “The length of the uncondi-
tional ﬁnancing stage (relative to total contract duration) captures the principal’s
propensity to continue ﬁnancing the project after its failure and therefore is related
7

===== PAGE 8 =====

to the measure of VC investors’ tolerance for failure in Tian and Wang (2011),
that is, VC investors’ willingness to continue ﬁnancing underperforming ventures.
Tian and Wang (2011) empirically document a positive relationship between VC
investors’ failure tolerance and innovation. Our model oﬀers an explanation for
this result that is based on the agency conﬂicts regarding the disclosure of failure.
Optimal ﬁnancing contracts for innovative projects — which are subject to severe
agency conﬂicts — involve a relatively long unconditional ﬁnancing stage, increasing
the likelihood that the project continues to receive ﬁnancing after failure. That is,
the principal tends to incentivize disclosure of failure less, precisely when agency
conﬂicts are severe (e.g., for innovative projects).”
The corresponding discussion in the main text is on page 24 where I write “The
quantityt1/T — that is, the length of the unconditional ﬁnancing stage t1 relative
to total contract duration T — captures the principal’s propensity to continue ﬁ-
nancing the project after its failure. Therefore, t1/T is related to the measure of VC
investors’ tolerance for failure in Tian and Wang (2014), that is, their willingness
to continue ﬁnancing underperforming ventures. Tian and Wang (2014) empirically
document a positive relationship between VC investors’ tolerance for failure and
innovation (measured by the number of produced patents as well as their citations).
Our ﬁndings provide an explanation for these ﬁndings that is based on agency con-
ﬂicts regarding the disclosure of failure. Because innovative projects (i.e., projects
that are likely to produce innovative outcomes such as patents) are complex and
characterized by severe agency conﬂicts (high φ), the optimal ﬁnancing contract
features a relatively long unconditional ﬁnancing stage and so tends to incentivize
disclosure of failure less, thus increasing the likelihood that the project continues to
receive ﬁnancing after failure.”
Second, I would like to thank you for the detailed comments and suggestions on speciﬁc
empirical implications presented in the introduction of the previous paper version. I have
incorporated your feedback and suggestions regarding the bullet points (a) through (f) as
follows.
(a) In the revised paper version, I have changed the corresponding statement to “The
8

===== PAGE 9 =====

unconditional ﬁnancing stage can also be interpreted as contractual grace or pro-
bationary period during which the agent is not (always) ﬁred after certain bad
outcomes”, so as to highlight that the agent is sometimes (i.e., after publicly ob-
served failure) but not always (i.e., after privately observed failure) terminated upon
failure.
(b) Thank you very much for your suggestion. In the revised version, I emphasize that
not the magnitude of liquidation rights but only the likelihood that the entrepreneur
has some liquidation rights is “backloaded.” In particular, I write on page 3 in
the introduction “Kaplan and Str¨ omberg (2003) indeed document that in the later
ﬁnancing stages, the founder is more likely to have liquidation rights or claims that
are senior/par to VC cumulative investment.”
(c) Figure 3 on page 29 plots the relative length of the unconditional ﬁnancing stage,
t1/T , against φ, capturing agency conﬂicts. Notice that t1/T proxies (to a ﬁrst
order) the principal’s propensity to ﬁnance the project after its failure. Moreover,
when t1/T is large (low), the principal tends to incentivize disclosure of failure
less (more). As shown in Figure 3, t1/T increases with φ, which means that the
principal tends to incentivize disclosure of failure less when agency conﬂicts become
more severe. To highlight this result more clearly, I write in the revised version of
the paper on the bottom of page 3 in the introduction “That is, the principal tends
to incentivize disclosure of failure less, precisely when agency conﬂicts are severe
(e.g., for innovative projects).” The same paragraph connects the model result that
t1/T increases with φ to empirical evidence in Tian and Wang (2014) (which was
discussed on pages 7 and 8 of this letter).
In addition, I have also updated Figure 3 on page 29 which plots now the ab-
solute length of the unconditional ﬁnancing stage t1. Notably, while T strictly
decreases with φ, t1 is hump-shaped (i.e., ﬁrst increases, then decreases) in φ, and
t1/T increases in φ. The intuition is as follows. As φ increases and moral hazard
exacerbates, the principal i) reduces the ﬁnancing deadline T and ii) provides rel-
atively more unconditional ﬁnancing (as disclosure becomes harder to incentivize).
While less disclosure incentives translate into higher t1 for moderate values of φ, a
9

===== PAGE 10 =====

“mechanical” eﬀects kicks in when φ becomes suﬃciently large: t1 is bounded from
above by the ﬁnancing deadline T which decreases with φ so that for suﬃciently
large φ, t1 must decrease in φ. This mechanical eﬀect also implies that because of
limφ→∞T = 0, it must be limφ→∞t1 = 0 (as t1≤T ).
(d) In the revised version, I have changed the corresponding statement to better high-
light my paper’s contribution. In particular, I write on page 4 in the introduction
“The model also applies to more general types of ﬁrms. In the context of executive
compensation contracts, the model highlights the tension that while instruments
like golden handshakes, golden parachutes, and severance pay provide incentives for
truthful disclosure of bad outcomes, they may also provide incentives to generate
bad outcomes on purpose (e.g., an acquisition that is not desirable for shareholders)
and/or to leave the ﬁrm. As a result, these instruments should not be in place in
the early stages of the contract (i.e., CEO tenure). Crucially, once in place, the
dollar value of these instruments should decrease over time and the CEO should be
provided strong incentives through performance pay that incentivize the CEO not
to generate bad outcomes.”
(f) Thank you very much for this clariﬁcation and your suggestions. I write now on
page 4 in the introduction “Interestingly, the optimal contract for projects that gen-
erate results quickly stipulates a relatively long unconditional ﬁnancing stage but
a short hard deadline. This shape of the optimal contract suggests that projects,
generating results quickly, are particularly suitable for a “spray and pray” invest-
ment approach in which VCs provide funding to (many) startups over a relatively
short horizon with limited governance and oversight (Ewens et al. (2018)).” The re-
vised statement reﬂects that while the “spray and pray” approach involves ﬁnancing
many startups, the ﬁnancing contract for any of these startups resembles a contract
with a (relatively) long unconditional ﬁnancing stage but a short hard deadline and
disclosure stage (whereby limited governance could mean less incentive provision for
disclosure). The statement is based on the result that t1/T decreases with 1/Λ and
T is hump-shaped in 1/Λ and therefore low for low values of 1 /Λ (see Figure 3 on
page 29). This ﬁnding is discussed in more detail on page 29.
10

===== PAGE 11 =====

3. Time-decreasing reward for failure . The key result in the solution for the optimal con-
tract is that in the disclosure regime the reward for failure must be time-decreasing. This
is both an important stand-alone result and a key intermediate step on the way to show
that the optimal contract has two distinct ﬁnancing stages. The intuition is quite clear,
but I am worried that it may rely on the assumption that there is no discounting in the
model. Discounting by itself generates a preference for consuming early (and thus report-
ing failure early), so it is not obvious that time-decreasing reward for failure would be a
feature of the optimal contract if there is discounting. And if the reward for failure is not
time-decreasing in the presence of discounting, then do we get the result that the optimal
contract has two stages of ﬁnancing, with the unconditional ﬁnancing stage followed by the
performance-sensitive stage? If the results in the paper require the absence of discount-
ing, then their relevance would be signiﬁcantly lower, because I cannot think of dynamic
economic environments in which the lack of discounting is a reasonable assumption. Per-
haps it can be an approximation when thinking about short horizons, but clearly in the
applications that the paper deals with (e.g., VC ﬁnancing) the horizon is not short.
I would like to thank you for this constructive comment on the paper and for en-
couraging me to analyze the model with discounting in a rigorous way. To address your
comment, I included Appendix C.2 (page 65) which derives the model solution when prin-
cipal and agent discount at rate r >0. I refer to Appendix C.2 in the main text in the
robustness section 5.2 on page 36.
In Appendix C.2, I show then that discounting does not change the qualitative results
and the shape of the optimal contract. In particular, with discounting, the optimal
contract continues to feature i) an unconditional ﬁnancing stage followed by ii) a disclosure
stage. The state variable w — which has now the dynamics ˙w =rw−φ — decreases over
time in both stages (i.e., ˙w <0). During the disclosure stage, w equals the rewards for
reported failure; thus, the disclosure stage features time-decreasing rewards for failure,
also in the presence of discounting.
Indeed, as you correctly pointed out, the dynamics of wt (i.e., ˙wt =rwt−φ) suggest
that wt need not decrease over time. In particular, ˙ wt≥ 0 when wt≥ w = φ
r , and the
deadline T = inf{t≥ 0 : wt = 0} might be inﬁnite. However, Appendix C.2 shows then
that in optimum, wt < w, so that ˙wt < 0 and, during the disclosure stage, wt = βt and
11

===== PAGE 12 =====

˙βt < 0, leading to time-decreasing rewards for failure.
Technical Comments
4. The paper could be clearer about what class of contracts the optimization is over. Even
after going over Appendix B, it is not clear to me if this contract is globally optimal or if
it is optimal in a class of contracts, and if it is the latter, then what this class is. More
clarity will be appreciated.
Thank you very much for this comment. I have done several things to address your
comment. First, I emphasize now that I solve for the optimal contract under the as-
sumption of full eﬀort, and I show later on in Appendix C.1 (page 64) that full eﬀort
is indeed optimal under the parameter assumptions Λ pµ > φ+κ and φ < κ. For this
sake, I added footnote 6 on page 9 stating “Appendix C.1 shows that full eﬀort is indeed
optimal, when Λpµ > φ+κ and φ < κ.” Moreover, I write on page 9: “We focus (with-
out loss of generality) on contracts that incentivize the agent not to fake failure.” The
argument why this assumption is without loss of generality is presented on page 13 below
the incentive constraint (7). Speciﬁcally: “If the agent ﬁnds it optimal to fake failure at
some time t with βt > 0, the agent reports failure and precipitates termination at time t
with certainty, while being paid βt > 0. Then, the principal could improve her payoﬀ by
stipulating termination with zero pay for the agent at timet.” That is, whenβt >W t and
(7) is violated, the agent precipitates termination with probability one at timet (provided
there has not been prior termination) and receives payβt > 0 from doing so, which cannot
be optimal for the principal who is better oﬀ by simply terminating the agent without
pay at time t.
Second, to provide additional details and discussion on the contracting problem, I
have included the last paragraph on the bottom of page 10: “Take any time t before
termination. When the agent has privately observed failure before time t, she decides at
timet whether i) to disclose failure at time t, ii) not to disclose failure at time t, or iii) to
randomize between i) and ii). The contract C incentivizes the agent i) to disclose failure
at time t, ii) not to disclose failure at time t, or iii) to randomize between i) and ii). The
payout structure and the deadline T implicitly determine these incentives.” Therefore, it
12

===== PAGE 13 =====

suﬃces to characterize the contract by the tuple C = (c,T ).
As I argue in footnote 9 on page 10, one could also write the contract in more extensive
form to include proposed eﬀort and disclosure of failure. In particular, I write “To save
on notation, we do not formally include the choice of whether to incentivize disclosure
into the description of the contract. One could also write the contract as a quadruple
C = (c,T, ˆa, ˆd) where ˆd ={ ˆdt} denotes on whether the contract incentivizes disclosure and
ˆa ={ˆat} denotes the proposed eﬀort level. In particular, ˆdt∈ [0, 1] denotes the probability
with which the agent is incentivized to disclose failure at time t (conditional on failure at
some times≤t); ˆdt can be inﬁnitesimal in which case disclosure occurs at some rate. Note
that this formulation encompasses the possibilities of incentivizing randomized disclosure
( ˆdt∈ (0, 1)) or delayed disclosure at time t (which would be obtained by setting ˆdt′ = 1
and ˆds = 0 for∈ [t,t′) for t′ >t ).”
Third, in response to your following two comments, I show that full eﬀort is optimal
(Appendix C.1 on page 64) and there is no stochastic disclosure (Lemma 6 on page 47),
so that the principal either incentivizes full disclosure or no disclosure at all. So, the
contract I solve for is globally optimal.
5. Lemma 5 in Appendix B shows that if and only if π >0, there exists a contract ˜C that
does not incentivize disclosure for times t∈ [0, ∆). While it proves that the full-disclosure
contract is not optimal if π >0, how do we know that the optimal contract belongs to the
class (no disclosure until ∆, full disclosure from ∆)? In principle, there can be contracts
that implement neither full disclosure nor full non-disclosure, e.g., if the agent discloses
failure only with some probability or if the agent discloses failure with some delay, and it
is unclear to me if this is considered.
Thank you very much for your comments. To address your ﬁrst point, I included
Lemma 6 on page 47 in Appendix B which shows that if the principal does not incentivize
“full” disclosure, then she does not incentivize disclosure at all, precluding randomization
over disclosure.
Let me give some overview of the arguments leading to this result. Lemma 5 in
Appendix B (page 46) demonstrates that a full disclosure contract is not optimal when
π > 0, and Lemma 4 in Appendix B (pages 44 and 45) shows that a full disclosure
13

===== PAGE 14 =====

continuation contract is optimal at any time t with Wt≥wt (that is, when Wt≥wt, the
principal incentivizes full disclosure at all future times s∈ [t,T ]). When π > 0, a full
disclosure contract is not optimal (see Lemma 5 on page 6). Then, there exists a time
interval [0,t 1) during which Wt < wt, whereby t1 = inf{t≥ 0 : Wt≥ wt}. We know
from Lemma 4 that from time t1 onwards (whenWt1≥wt1), the contract incentivizes full
disclosure (i.e., the optimal continuation contract is a full disclosure contract). As you
have correctly pointed out, in the previous draft, I did not provide a detailed argument for
why this already implies that the contract incentivizes no disclosure (at all) over [0 ,t 1).
Lemma 6 on page 47 of the revised version ﬁlls this gap.
In principle, the contract could incentivize the agent to randomize between disclosure
and no-disclosure. Suppose to the contrary the principal incentivizes the agent to ran-
domize at time t<t 1. But, in this case, the agent must be indiﬀerent between disclosure
and no-disclosure, so that βt =wt. To incentivize the agent not to fake failure, it must be
thatWt≥βt, which contradicts the fact thatWt <w t fort<t 1. As a result, the principal
either incentivizes full disclosure of failure (in which case Wt = wt) or no disclosure at
all (in which case Wt < wt) and, in particular, does not incentivize randomization over
disclosure.
I address your point on delayed disclosure in footnote 9 on page 10 which I have
discussed in response to one of your previous points. I argue that the i) the contract
can be written in more extensive form, explicitly keeping track of the principal’s choice
to incentivize disclosure, and ii) the contract formulation encompasses the possibility
of (incentivizing) delayed disclosure. In particular, I write “Note that this formulation
encompasses the possibilities of incentivizing randomized disclosure (ˆdt∈ (0, 1)) or delayed
disclosure at time t (which would be obtained by setting ˆdt′ = 1 and ˆds = 0 for ∈ [t,t′)
fort′ >t ).” Importantly, your intuition was correct and delayed disclosure is indeed part
of the optimal contract. Speciﬁcally, the optimal contract I solve for features delayed
disclosure due to the unconditional ﬁnancing stage. That is, at any time t < t1 (i.e.,
during the unconditional ﬁnancing stage), the principal incentivizes the agent to disclose
failure at time t1, thereby eﬀectively incentivizing delayed disclosure.
6. The paper restricts attention to contracts that implement full eﬀort at all times. It
would be helpful to state suﬃcient parameter restrictions under which implementation of
14

===== PAGE 15 =====

full eﬀort is optimal. .
Thank you very much for looking into the technical arguments in detail. Indeed, as
you point out correctly, I solved for the optimal contract under the assumption that the
principal implements full eﬀort without specifying conditions on the optimality of eﬀort.
To address your comment, I prove in Appendix C.1 (pages 64) that full eﬀort is indeed
optimal, provided that the project has suﬃciently high net present value (Λ pµ > κ+φ)
and that shirking is ineﬃcient ( φ < κ). Both parameter conditions are assumed to hold
throughout the entire paper.
Intuitively, the characterization of the optimality of full eﬀort is simple compared
to prior papers in the dynamic contracting literature (such as DeMarzo and Sannikov
(2006) or Zhu (2012)), because the choice of eﬀort does not aﬀect the dynamics of w (i.e.,
˙w =−φ) which is the key state variable in the model.
7. The extension in Section 5 is potentially interesting, but I could not ﬁgure out what
contracting problem is being solved in this section. The contracting problem is not stated
formally either in the section or in the appendix and the informal description is unclear.
For example, it says: “The outcome of an inspection is public knowledge and contractible.
But, the principal cannot commit to an inspection policy, in that inspection dates are
not contractible.” What is the meaning of “inspection dates are not contractible”? Does it
simply mean that inspection is a hidden action taken by the principal or does it mean more
than that? If it means that inspection is a hidden action, and if the principal can contract
on the outcome of the inspection policy, cannot the principal eﬀectively also commit himself
to speciﬁc inspection dates by postulating very large transfers for inspection outcomes that
arrive on dates at which the inspection is not desirable? More formal details are needed,
at least, in the appendix.
Thank you very much for your comment and for encouraging me to formalize the
contracting problem. The assumptions in the previous paper version were to reﬂect that
the principal cannot commit i) to stochastic inspections and ii) to inspections after the
agent reports failure (to incentivize the agent not to fake failure), so that there are no
stochastic inspections and no inspections after the agent reports failure. 3 The general
3If the principal could commit to inspections after the agent report failure, she can incentivize the
15

===== PAGE 16 =====

solution with full commitment to any monitoring/inspection strategy is likely complicated
and beyond the scope of the paper.
To address your comments, the revised version formalizes the assumptions underlying
the contracting problem with inspections. To achieve more clarity and simplicity, I explic-
itly state in the beginning of Section 4 on page 32 “ We consider inspections that occur at
deterministic times, and that inspections and their outcomes are publicly observable and
contractible subject to the following limited commitment constraint: the principal cannot
commit to inspections that yield at the time of inspection an expected post-inspection
continuation payoﬀ (strictly) lower than the inspection costs K.4 The intuition behind
this limited commitment constraint is that the principal cannot commit to inspections
that yield her a negative continuation payoﬀ (i.e., the principal’s continuation payoﬀ must
be positive at all times). The limited commitment constraint precludes that the principal
inspects the project after failure is reported.”
A more detailed description of the contracting environment and the underlying as-
sumptions can be found in Appendix B.5 on page 56 where I write “A contract C =
(α,β,τ M,T ) stipulates for any time t (before termination of ﬁnancing, i.e., before time
τA∧T ), the agent’s pay for success αt, the agent’s pay for reported failure βt, and the
next inspection dateτM
t ≥t. That is, the principal inspects the project at (deterministic)
time τM
t if ﬁnancing is not terminated before time τM
t ; if ﬁnancing is terminated before
time τM
t , the game ends at termination, and there are no more inspections. Besides, the
contract stipulates a ﬁnancing deadline T .”
Appendix B.5.1 on page 56 then discusses how inspections generate incentives for the
agent. The principal’s optimization is then presented in Appendix B.5.2 on page 57. The
subsequent Appendices B.5.3, B.5.4, B.5.5, and B.5.6 present the diﬀerent steps in the
solution to the principal’s problem.
The principal inspects or terminates the project (whichever is optimal) whenever w
agent not to fake failure by inspecting the project after a failure report, which would make the principal’s
inspection strategy complicated.
4Formally, this limited constraint is as follows. Consider a potential inspection at time t, and let
lims↑t s denote the time “just before” inspection. Then, lim s↑t qs is the principal’s belief (just before the
inspection) that the project has failed. Let ˆFt denote the principal’s continuation payoﬀ if an inspection
at time t yields that the project has not failed yet. Then, the limited commitment constraint states that
the principal only inspects (can commit to inspect) the project at time t if (1− lims↑t qs) ˆFt≥ K, as the
principal’s payoﬀ is zero when an inspection reveals failure.
16

===== PAGE 17 =====

reaches zero. After an inspection yields that the project has not failed yet, the contract
is “restarted” so that w is reset to w0 and the principal’s continuation payoﬀ becomes
F0. As an inspection allows the principal to reset the state variable w, inspections play,
mathematically, a similar role in the principal’s optimization as the possibility of costly
replacement of the manager in DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006).
Based on the analysis of Section 5, I derive additional empirical implications, such as
the positive relation between VC monitoring and startup success (Bernstein et al. (2016)).
This result is based on the fact that whenK >0 is suﬃciently small, the principal prefers
an inspection over termination, and inspects the project at all times with w = 0, so that
there is no ﬁnancing deadline and ﬁnancing is never terminated before completion.
This result is discussed in the introduction on page 5 where I write “Our model
also provides an explanation for the positive relationship between VC monitoring and
startup success (Bernstein et al. (2016)): VCs who regularly inspect and monitor the
startup are less likely to terminate ﬁnancing prematurely, thereby increasing the likelihood
of eventual success.” Likewise, in the main text on page 34, I write “Our results also
deliver an explanation for the positive relationship between VC monitoring and startup
success (Bernstein et al. (2016)). VCs who regularly inspect and monitor the startup
(e.g., because K is suﬃciently small) are less likely to terminate ﬁnancing prematurely,
thereby increasing the likelihood of eventual success.”
17

===== PAGE 18 =====

Other Comments
8. To get the result that two diﬀerent ﬁnancing regions occur under the optimal contract,
it is very important to have π >0, i.e., some public news about the failure of the project.
However, the role of this assumption does not come across from the introduction or from
the intuitive description of the optimality of unconditional ﬁnancing on page 16 of the main
text. For example, all sentences in the ﬁrst paragraph of Section 2.3.2 hold regardless of
π >0 or π = 0.
In the revised version, I have done two things to address your comments. First, I
highlight that π = 0 is a knife-edge case of my model. In particular, I write in the ﬁrst
paragraph of page 7 “Unless otherwise mentioned, we consider that π∈ (0, 1); the knife-
edge cases π = 0 and π = 1 serve as useful benchmarks in understanding the solution.”
Second, in the last paragraph of page 21, I convey some intuition for why the case
π = 0 is diﬀerent which is based on the analogy of the contracting problem at t = 0
as a static adverse selection problem. In particular, I write “A full disclosure contract
(i.e., t1 = 0) is optimal when π = 0. To get some intuition, suppose that nature draws
at time t = 0 whether failure, if it occurs, is privately observed (with probability 1 −π)
or publicly observed (with probability π); this draw is not known to principal and agent
at t = 0. That is, with probability 1 −π, the principal faces an agent who “always”
privately observes failure (if failure occurs) and, with probabilityπ, an agent who “never”
privately observes failure (if failure occurs). A full disclosure contract requires to grant
the agent very high rents W0 ex-ante at t = 0, irrespective of whether the agent ends up
privately observing failure (i.e., irrespective of the agent type). However, with probability
π, the principal faces an agent who does not privately observe failure (if it occurs) and
so “overpays” this agent under a full disclosure contract, which renders the full disclosure
contract ineﬃcient when π > 0. Conversely, when π = 0, the principal never overpays
the agent under the full disclosure contract which is therefore optimal.”
9. I think the extension in Section 4 is less interesting than the one in Section 5 and can
be dropped. I ﬁnd it diﬃcult to relate the notion of a failed project later succeeding to the
real world. In particular, it is unclear to me why unicorns must have low λ compared to
non-unicorns.
18

===== PAGE 19 =====

Thank you very much for your suggestion. I have followed your advice and removed
Section 4 from the paper, also because the paper is already quite long and the ratio
of insights to complications of formerly Section 4 was not great. I have also removed
the corresponding paragraphs in the introduction and the corresponding sections in the
Appendix.
10. In Proposition 3, shouldn’t w0 maximize F∗(w0) instead of F (w0)?
Thank you very much for reading the Proposition in detail and for (correctly) pointing
out this typo. I have corrected this typo in the revised version.
I want to thank you once again for your comments and feedback on my paper. I look
forward to hearing from you.
19

===== PAGE 20 =====

References
Bengtsson, O. and B. A. Sensoy (2011). Investor abilities and ﬁnancial contracting:
Evidence from venture capital. Journal of Financial Intermediation 20 (4), 477–502.
Bengtsson, O. and B. A. Sensoy (2015). Changing the nexus: The evolution and renegotia-
tion of venture capital contracts. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 50 (3),
349–375.
Bernstein, S., X. Giroud, and R. R. Townsend (2016). The impact of venture capital
monitoring. The Journal of Finance 71 (4), 1591–1622.
DeMarzo, P. M. and Y. Sannikov (2006). Optimal security design and dynamic capital
structure in a continuous-time agency model.The Journal of Finance 61 (6), 2681–2724.
Eisfeldt, A. L. and A. A. Rampini (2008). Managerial incentives, capital reallocation, and
the business cycle. Journal of Financial Economics 87 (1), 177–199.
Ewens, M., A. Gorbenko, and A. Korteweg (2021). Venture capital contracts. Journal of
Financial Economics.
Ewens, M., R. Nanda, and M. Rhodes-Kropf (2018). Cost of experimentation and the
evolution of venture capital. Journal of Financial Economics 128 (3), 422–442.
Ewens, M., R. Nanda, and C. T. Stanton (2020). The evolution of CEO compensation in
venture capital backed startups. Working Paper .
Inderst, R. and H. M. Mueller (2010). CEO replacement under private information. The
Review of Financial Studies 23 (8), 2935–2969.
Kaplan, S. N. and P. Str¨ omberg (2003). Financial contracting theory meets the real
world: An empirical analysis of venture capital contracts. The review of economic
studies 70 (2), 281–315.
Levitt, S. D. and C. M. Snyder (1997). Is no news bad news? information transmission
and the role of” early warning” in the principal-agent model. The RAND Journal of
Economics, 641–661.
20

===== PAGE 21 =====

Puri, M. and R. Zarutskie (2012). On the life cycle dynamics of venture-capital-and
non-venture-capital-ﬁnanced ﬁrms. The Journal of Finance 67 (6), 2247–2293.
Tian, X. and T. Y. Wang (2011). Tolerance for failure and corporate innovation. The
Review of Financial Studies 27 (1), 211–255.
Tian, X. and T. Y. Wang (2014). Tolerance for failure and corporate innovation. The
Review of Financial Studies 27 (1), 211–255.
Zhu, J. Y. (2012). Optimal contracts with shirking. Review of Economic Studies 80 (2),
812–839.
21