

===== PAGE 1 =====

Automated Market Making and Loss-Versus-Rebalancing ∗
Jason Milionis
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
jm@cs.columbia.edu
Ciamac C. Moallemi
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
ciamac@gsb.columbia.edu
Tim Roughgarden
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
a16z Crypto
tim.roughgarden@gmail.com
Anthony Lee Zhang
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
anthony.zhang@chicagobooth.edu
Initial version: July 31, 2022
Current version: May 27, 2024
Abstract
We consider the market microstructure of automated market makers (AMMs) from the
perspective of liquidity providers (LPs). Our central contribution is a “Black-Scholes formula for
AMMs”. We identify the main adverse selection cost incurred by LPs, which we call “loss-versus-
rebalancing” (LVR, pronounced “lever”). LVR captures costs incurred by AMM LPs due to stale
prices that are picked off by better informed arbitrageurs. We derive closed-form expressions for
LVR applicable to all automated market makers. Our model is quantitatively realistic, matching
actual LP returns empirically, and shows how CFMM protocols can be redesigned to reduce or
eliminate LVR.
1. Introduction
In recent years, automated market makers (AMMs) have emerged as the dominant mechanism
for decentralized exchange on blockchains. Most (but not all) of the deployed AMMs have the
form of a constant function market maker (CFMM) such as Uniswap [Adams et al., 2020, 2021].
Compared to electronic limit order books (LOBs), which are the dominant market structure for
∗The second author thanks Richard Dewey, Craig Newbold, Guillermo Angeris, Tarun Chitra, and Alex Evans for
helpful conversations on automated market making. We are also grateful to Austin Adams, Jun Aoyagi, Eric Budish,
Larry Glosten, Gur Huberman, Mingxuan He, Thomas Rivera, Xin Wan, and Tianyi Zhang for helpful comments.
The second author was supported by the Briger Family Digital Finance Lab at Columbia Business School and is
an advisor to fintech companies. The third author is Head of Research at a16z Crypto, a venture capital firm with
investments in automated market making protocols. The first author was supported in part by NSF award CNS-
2212745, and in part by an unrestricted gift from Gnosis, Ltd. The third author was supported in part by NSF
awards CCF-2006737 and CNS-2212745.
1
arXiv:2208.06046v5  [q-fin.MF]  27 May 2024

===== PAGE 2 =====

traditional, centralized exchange-based electronic markets, CFMMs offer some advantages. First
of all, they are efficient computationally. They have minimal storage needs, and matching com-
putations can be done quickly, typically via constant-time closed-form algebraic computations. In
an LOB, on the other hand, matching engine calculations may involve complex data structures
and computations that scale with the number of orders. Thus, CFMMs are uniquely suited to the
severely computation- and storage-constrained environment of the blockchain. Second, LOBs are
not well-suited to a “long-tail” of illiquid assets. This is because they require the participation of
active market makers. In contrast, AMMs mainly rely on passive liquidity providers (LPs).
The goal of this paper is to understand the returns to providing liquidity in an AMM, in a
manner which is inspired by the Black and Scholes [1973] model of option pricing. The Black-Scholes
model builds on the insight that options can be replicated by dynamically trading the underlying
stock. From this insight, the model can be used to analyze option returns both qualitatively and
quantitatively. Qualitatively, the Black-Scholes model shows how option returns are related to the
underlying stock’s return, volatility, and other parameters. Quantitatively, the model is realistic
enough that it can be used to price options, by plugging in values for model parameters.
Analogous to the Black-Scholes approach, we aim to construct a model of AMM LP returns,
which both delivers qualitative insights about the factors that affect LP profitability, and is quanti-
tatively realistic enough to bring to data. We begin with the idea of replicating the AMM’s trades
by dynamically trading the underlying asset at market prices; we call this trading scheme therebal-
ancing strategy. The AMM LP position systematically underperforms relative to the rebalancing
strategy; we call the performance gap loss-versus-rebalancing, (or L VR, pronounced “lever”). The
source of underperformance isprice slippage: due to the passive nature of AMM liquidity provision,
whenever risky asset prices move, AMMs trade at worse-than-market prices. The concept of loss-
versus-rebalancing, as we present it hereby, applies forany AMM with mild regularity assumptions.
Therefore, L VRdoes not only refer to and is not a quantity specific to CFMMs; L VRcharacterizes
the behavior of general AMMs. We derive a simple expression forL VRon locally-smooth AMMs (of
which CFMMs is only a special case), which depends only on two parameters: the volatility of the
underlying asset, and the marginal liquidity of the AMM’s demand curve. We then use our model
to empirically analyze the Uniswap v2 WETH-USDC pair. Our model quantitatively performs
well in matching LP returns. Our results have implications for measuring the returns to providing
2

===== PAGE 3 =====

liquidity for AMMs, as well as for redesigning AMMs to limit L VRand thus decrease the effective
trading fees charged to AMM traders.
We model trading between a risky asset and a numéraire. The two assets can be traded on an
AMM and a centralized exchange (CEX). We assume the CEX is infinitely deep, so the risky asset
can be traded on the CEX with no price impact. As in the Black-Scholes model, we assume the
risky asset’s price follows a geometric Brownian motion with possibly stochastic volatility. There
are two kinds of traders in the model. Noise traders trade with the AMM, contributing fees to
AMM LPs. Arbitrageurs trade with the AMM and the CEX to maximize profits. We assume
arbitrageurs pay no fees, implying that arbitrageurs ensure that the AMM’s price is always equal
to the CEX price. In the case that the AMM is a CFMM, the CFMM is described by an invariant
curvef (x,y ) =L; the CFMM is willing to make any trade such that it stays on this level curve.
We define the rebalancing strategy as a trading strategy which holds whatever amount of the
risky asset the AMM holds at any point in time, but adjusts its positions in the risky asset by
trading at CEX prices, rather than AMM prices. Shorting the rebalancing strategy effectively
delta-hedges the AMM LP position. We show that, ignoring fees, AMM LPs always do worse
than the rebalancing strategy. We define loss-versus-rebalancing, or L VR, as the gap between
the rebalancing strategy’s performance, and the AMM LP’s performance. The intuition for this
underperformance is related to the phenomenon of “sniping” in high-frequency trading settings. In
the model of Budish et al. [2015], a market maker quotes prices to trade a risky asset. Whenever
public information arrives causing the fair price of the risky asset to move, there is a “speed race”
between the quoting market maker to cancel her order, and other traders to “snipe” the market
maker’s stale quotes.
AMMs can be thought of as quoting market makers who do not proactively update their price
quotes; they only ever change prices in response to trades. Thus, whenever CEX prices move, AMM
quotes become “stale”, giving arbitrageurs opportunities to profit by “sniping” the AMM, until the
point where AMM prices are equal to CEX prices. AMMs thus lose money from price slippage:
every trade which the AMM makes is executed at slightly worse prices than the rebalancing strategy,
which buys and sells at CEX prices. L VRconsists of the aggregate losses incurred from such price
slippage.
Instantaneous L VRdepends on only two parameters on locally-smooth AMMs: the instantaneous
3

===== PAGE 4 =====

variance of asset prices, and the marginal liquidity available — the slope of the AMM’s demand
function for the risky asset — at the current price level in the pool. That is, AMM losses from
price slippage are greater when prices move more, and when the AMM trades more aggressively
in response to price movements. Asset price volatility is straightforward to measure, and marginal
liquidity can be calculated based on the formula for the AMM’s demand curve (in the special sub-
case of CFMMs, this comes from the CFMM’s level sets), implying that our model can be used to
measure L VRfor any asset pair and AMM empirically.
The Black-Scholes model also implies that options can be delta-hedged by trading the underlying
stock; a delta-hedged call option is a pure bet on whether the volatility implied by option prices is
greater than realized volatility. Analogously, the concept of L VRcan be used the basis of a trading
strategy involving delta-hedging LP positions. A portfolio which holds a long position in the AMM
LP, and a short position in the rebalancing strategy, is always hedged to first-order at any point
against directional movements in the risky asset’s prices. At any point in time, the position is thus
a bet on whether accrued trading fees are large enough to compensate for L VRlosses due to price
slippage; the strategy profits if fees are large relative to the product of price volatility and marginal
liquidity, and loses money otherwise.
We use our model to empirically analyze the Uniswap v2 ETH-USDC trading pair. The analysis
has two goals. First, we show that our model-predicted L VRis very close to the returns fromdelta-
hedged LPing — a trading strategy which holds a long position in the CFMM LP, and a short
position in the rebalancing strategy. Second, our analysis shows how “hedged LP” methodology
can be used to improve the measurement of LP returns. Hedged LPing is much less risky than
unhedged LPing: hedged LP P&L has a standard deviation of returns of around 1%–6% (depending
on the hedging frequency) of the standard deviation of returns of unhedged LPP&L. This indicates
that the vast majority of variation in unhedged LP returns is driven simply by the LP position’s
exposure to market risk in the underlying assets, which can be easily eliminated by shorting the
rebalancing strategy. Researchers analyzing the economic drivers of LP profitability should thus
analyze hedged LP returns: by removing LP positions’ mechanical exposures to market risk, this
methodology allows the researcher to focuses on the economic tradeoff of whether fees, pool token
incentives, and other such benefits to LPs are large enough to outweigh losses from price slippage.
Our procedure requires very little data to apply: the researcher simply needs a time series of the
4

===== PAGE 5 =====

asset holdings of the CFMM LP, as well as any mints and burns, and a time series of CEX prices
of the risky asset.
Next, we discuss connections between AMM LP positions and the three classical ways that
volatility can be traded: static (European) options, dynamic trading strategies, and variance swaps
[Carr and Madan, 2001]. We model the AMM reserves at the static payoff of a pool value function.
This relates to Clark [2020], Fukasawa et al. [2022], and Deng et al. [2023], who show that AMM LP
payoffs, over any finite time horizon, can be replicated by shorting a bundle of European options.
These option positions, in turn, are equivalent to dynamic trading strategies which sells (buys)
the asset when prices increase (decrease). In our setting, the rebalancing strategy plays the role
of delta-hedging. Finally, an delta-hedged LP position can be thought of as a generalized variance
swap, whose payoff over any given time period is equal to realized variance weighted by the marginal
liquidity of the AMMs.
A common benchmark used by practitioners to measure AMM LP losses is “impermanent loss”.
Impermanent loss compares the performance of a AMM LP position to a portfolio which simply
holds the LP’s initial bundle of assets; this differs from L VR, which compares LP performance
to the rebalancing strategy. On the one hand, we show that the risk-neutral expectation of L VR
and impermanent loss — and in fact with any other benchmark strategy which trades at market
prices — is the same. On the other hand, L VRis the unique choice of benchmark which eliminates
differences attributable to market risk. Mathematically, the loss of an AMM LP position relative
to any other benchmark can be thought of as L VR, plus a noise term due to difference between the
market risk exposures of the benchmark and the AMM LP.
Our results have implications for AMM design.L VRcan be used by AMM protocol designers for
guidance to set fees. This is because in a competitive market for liquidity provision, there should
be no excess profits for LPs, and hence fees should balance withL VR. For example, since L VRscales
with variance, one might imagine fee mechanisms that also scale with variance. Or, alternatively,
protocols could be constructed that compare L VRversus fee income in a backward looking window,
increasing fees if they are below L VR, and decreasing fees if they are above L VR. More specula-
tively, our results suggest a potential approach to redesign AMMs to reduce or eliminate L VR: an
AMM which has access to a reliable and high-frequency price oracle could in principle quote prices
arbitrarily close to market prices for the risky asset, thus eliminating losses from price slippage,
5

===== PAGE 6 =====

and achieving payoffs arbitrarily close to that of the rebalancing strategy. Relatedly, AMMs could
sell special rights to arbitrage LPs to special wallets, “capturing” expected L VRand redistributing
the profits to AMM LPs.
Related literature. We make a number of contributions relative to the literature. Theoretically, we
are the first to propose, for CFMMs with general bonding functions, that LP positions’ losses should
be measured relative to the rebalancing strategy. Our analysis shows that the losses of AMM LPs
can be thought of as arising fromprice slippage, due to systematically trading at worse-than-market
prices. Quantitatively, our model shows how L VRcan be calculated based on price volatility and
bonding function curvature. The fact that LP losses are qualitatively related to these quantities is
known in the literature,1 but our quantification for general bonding functions is, to our knowledge,
new.2 Finally, our novel “delta-hedging” methodology forL VRmeasurement may also be useful for
future empirical work on CFMM LP profitability.
Since we introduced the concept, L VRhas evolved into a centerpiece in practical applications
and analyses, having had wide impact within decentralized finance. L VRand markouts have been
used in practice to measure hedged LP returns of AMM pools, including those of concentrated
liquidity market makers [Elsts, 2023, CrocSwap, 2022], and A number of industry groups are also
working to build AMMs which utilize our insights to attempt to reduce or eliminate L VR[Canidio
and Fritsch, 2023, Cata Labs, 2023, Fenbushi Capital, 2023, Algebra Protocol, 2023, Klages-Mundt
and Schuldenzucker, 2022, Aori Protocol, 2023, Adams et al., 2024].
Our paper relates to a sizable recent literature on automated market makers. Lehar and Par-
lour [2021] compare liquidity provision in limit order books and AMMs. In their model, as in
ours, liquidity providers make profits from liquidity traders, and lose when risky asset prices move
and arbitrageurs “snipe” stale CFMM quotes. Lehar and Parlour [2021] show theoretically and
empirically that equilibrium pool size is smaller when asset volatility is higher, and characterize
a number of other stylized facts of Uniswap liquidity pools. In a similar setting, Capponi and
Jia [2021] also show that CFMM LPs suffer losses when risky asset prices move, analyzing both
1See, for example, Evans [2020], Lehar and Parlour [2021], and Capponi and Jia [2021]
2Outside the financial economics literature, similar results to our decomposition have been derived for specific
bonding functions. For example, Boueri [2021] also derives an explicit expression for impermanent loss, in the special
case of geometric mean market makers; in this specific case, the impermanent loss is isomorphic to L VR. A number
of subsequent papers have built on our approach [Hasbrouck et al., 2023], some using different terminology fromL VR
[Cartea et al., 2022, 2023].
6

===== PAGE 7 =====

the “rebalancing” arbitrage we study in this paper, as well as “reversal” arbitrage from exploiting
noise traders. Capponi and Jia [2021] calculate the optimal convexity of the CFMM invariant, for
trading off losses from arbitrage and increased price impact from investors. Lehar and Parlour
[2021] and Capponi and Jia [2021] go beyond the present paper in that they are equilibrium models
for liquidity provision. The intuition that LP losses are related to the size of price movements
and the curvature of bonding functions has been made in many of these papers. These existing
papers use stylized two-period models which are not amenable to quantification; these papers also
generally focus on expected losses of CFMM LPs. Our richer continuous-time framework allows us
to conceptually distinguish “market risk” from L VR; moreover, our model can be used to empiri-
cally quantify CFMM LP losses, using either our analytical formula based on price volatility and
bonding function curvature, or our simpler empirical “delta-hedging” methodology.
More broadly, Lehar et al. [2022] and Hasbrouck et al. [2022] theoretically and empirically
analyze CFMM fees, and their effects on trade volume and price efficiency. Barbon and Ranaldo
[2021], Foley et al. [2023], Lehar and Parlour [2021], and Han et al. [2021] empirically compare
price impact, price efficiency, and net trading fees on centralized and decentralized exchanges.
Other papers analyzing CFMMs include Augustin et al. [2022], Brolley and Zoican [2023], Aoyagi
[2020], Aoyagi and Ito [2021], Park [2021], Fang [2022], and Hasbrouck et al. [2023]. Arbitrage
profits are a form of miner extractable value (MEV). Qin et al. [2022] empirically quantifies this
and other types of CFMM related MEV, including “sandwich” attacks. Sandwich attacks are also
considered by Zhou et al. [2021] empirically. Our results also show how CFMM LP losses are
analogous to the “quote-sniping” losses of market makers in high-frequency trading models [Budish
et al., 2015, Biais et al., 2015, Baldauf and Mollner, 2020, Aquilina et al., 2022].
A number of papers outside the financial economics literature apply tools from convex analysis
to analyze CFMMs. Angeris et al. [2019] show analytically and through agent-based simulations
that CPMMs are able to closely track the reference prices of underlying assets. In a manner related
to this paper, Angeris and Chitra [2020] and Angeris et al. [2021a,b] apply tools from convex analysis
(e.g., the pool reserve value function) to study the more general case of constant function market
makers. Angeris et al. [2021b] also analyze LP profits, but do not relate them to the rebalancing
strategy or express them in closed-form. Relative to these earlier papers, our contribution is to
explicitly decompose LP losses into the returns on the rebalancing strategy and L VRfor general
7

===== PAGE 8 =====

CFMMs, to show how the L VRcomponent corresponds to arbitrageur profits, and to show how
these ideas can be used to measure LP losses empirically.3
Another group of papers draws analogies between CFMMs and options; we discuss the relation-
ship between our results and these papers in detail in Section 7. Clark [2020] replicates the payoff of
a constant product market over a finite time horizon in terms of a static portfolio of European put
and call options. Tassy and White [2020] compute the growth rate of a constant product market
maker with fees. Lambert [2022] considers a number of related issues. Boueri [2021] considers the
profitability of geometric mean market makers under geometric Brownian motion dynamics; his
(re-)definition of “impermanent loss” in that setting is equivalent to L VR. Boueri [2021] also does
not show the relationship between L VRand arbitrageur profits. Subsequent to the first publicly
available version of our paper, Cartea et al. [2022] and Cartea et al. [2023] discussed the concept of
“predictable loss”; the “convexity cost” component of predictable loss in their setting is equivalent
to L VR.
Outline. The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes some institutional details of AMMs.
Section 3 describes our model. Section 4 contains our main results. Section 5 shows expressions for
loss-versus-rebalancing for a number of CFMM invariants used in practice. Section 6 contains our
empirical analysis. Section 7 discusses the relationship of AMM LPs to options and other ways to
trade volatility. Section 8 discusses the relationship between L VRand other benchmarks, such as
impermanent loss. We discuss practical implications of our results for AMM design in Section 9,
and conclude in Section 10. Proofs and supplementary results are contained in the appendix.
2. Institutional Background
Automated market makers have their origin in the classic literature on prediction markets and
market scoring rules; see Pennock and Sami [2007] for a survey of this area. Constant function
3In particular, a number of papers have characterized expected losses of CFMM LPs – sometimes referred to as
expected “impermanent loss” – in more or less general cases. To our knowledge, the σ2
8 formula for the constant
product market maker first appeared in Evans [2020], and has appeared in many papers since. As we discuss in
Section 8, the (risk-neutral) expectations of “impermanent loss” and L VRare equal, but L VRdoes not contain market
risk; we view this as an important conceptual distinction, and it also leads to cleaner empirical measures of LP losses.
Moreover, the literature applying tools from convex analysis has not emphasized that convexity losses are equivalent
to arbitrageur profits; as we discuss in Section 9, this insight is key to showing how AMMs could be redesigned to
reduce or eliminate L VR.
8

===== PAGE 9 =====

market makers, which are characterized by a invariant or bonding function, build on the utility-
based market making framework of Chen and Pennock [2007]. In that framework, utility indifference
conditions define a bonding function for binary payoff Arrow-Debreu securities. More recent interest
in CFMMs has been prompted by an entirely new application: its functioning as a decentralized
exchange mechanism, first proposed by Buterin [2016] and Lu and Köppelmann [2017].
An automated market maker (AMM) is a smart contract which allows market participants
to trade one cryptoasset with another directly on the blockchain, rather than using a centralized
exchange. Suppose, for example, that a market participant wanted to trade an asset such as ETH
held in her blockchain wallet for another asset, such as USDC. She could do so on a custodial
centralized exchange (CEX), such as Binance, by “depositing” her ETH by sending it to Binance
on the blockchain; trading Binance-custodied ETH for custodied USDC; and then “withdrawing”
the USDC, directing Binance to send USDC back into her personal blockchain wallet. This process
has a number of costs. The market participant must give the CEX custody over her cryptoassets,
exposing her to exchange credit risk. Market participants must have a CEX trading account; many
CEXs impose jurisdictional and identification requirements, often imposed by national regulators
to satisfy know-your-customer or anti-money-laundering laws, which market participants may be
unwilling or unable to satisfy. The CEX must enable trading of the asset pair in question; many
tokens with small market caps are simply not listed on CEXs for trade. Moreover, the rules for
determining trade priority and prices on CEXs are not always transparent, and CEXs may impose
deposit, withdrawal, and settlement fees or delays on their users.
AMMs present an alternative to CEX trading which circumvents many of these costs. Tech-
nically, AMMs are “smart contract” wallets, meaning they are blockchain wallets which can hold
cryptoassets, but whose behavior is determined fully by blockchain code rather than human discre-
tion. In this example, the AMM wallet holds some inventory of ETH and USDC. When a trader
submits a blockchain transaction to trade ETH for USDC, ETH is sent from the user to the AMM’s
inventory, and USDC is sent from the AMM’s inventory to a user, in a single atomic transaction.
We will discuss how the trade price is determined in Section 3 below. There are no barriers to
access to AMMs: any individual can initiate a transaction with any AMM. There is no credit risk,
since trades are completed in a single step, and it is not possible to lose the sold assets without
gaining the purchased assets. The mechanisms through which trade prices are calculated is com-
9

===== PAGE 10 =====

paratively transparent: for example, the Uniswap v2 smart contract consists of under a thousand
lines of publicly available code.4 Once “deployed” to the blockchain, no one, not even the creator,
can modify the code. AMMs thus present an attractive trading option for market participants who
do not want exposure to exchange credit risk, who face barriers to accessing CEXs, or who value
the transparency of AMM behavior.
The asset inventory AMMs use to trade is provided in a decentralized manner: any market
participant can become a “liquidity provider” (LP) in a ETH-USDC AMM, or any other pair of
tokens,5 by contributing ETH and USDC to the AMM’s inventory. The AMM pool then trades
using these contributed assets as a part of its inventory, and any trading fees accrue proportionately
to the liquidity inventory providers depending on her share. At any point, the liquidity providers
can withdraw ETH and USDC corresponding to her share of the pool; however, the amounts of
ETH and USDC withdrawn will generally differ from what the liquidity provider first contributed,
as inventory adjusts with market participants’ trade requests and fees are collected. The economic
problem facing LPs, which is the core focus of our paper, is how to evaluate the costs and benefits
of providing liquidity to AMMs.
3. Model
In what follows, we describe the frictionless, continuous-time Black-Scholes setting of our model.
Assets. Fix a filtered probability space
(
Ω,F,{Ft}t≥0, Q
)
where Q is a risk-neutral or equivalent
martingale measure, satisfying the usual assumptions. Suppose there are two assets,6 a risky asset
x and a numéraire assety. Without loss of generality, assume that the risk-free rate is zero. There
is an infinitely deep centralized exchange, where the risky asset can be traded with zero fees. The
price on the centralized exchange is observable, and evolves exogenously according to a geometric
Brownian motion that is a continuous Q-martingale, i.e.,
dPt
Pt
=σtdBQ
t , ∀ t≥ 0,
4See the Uniswap v2 repository.
5In particular, a market participant can begin LPing a pair of assets even if no one else is providing liquidity for
it, thus effectively listing the pair of assets for trade.
6This assumption is without loss of generality, we describe the multi-dimensional case where there are n ≥ 2
assets, none of which need be the numéraire, in Appendix B.3.
10

===== PAGE 11 =====

with a stochastic volatility process7 given byσt> 0, and where BQ
t is a Q-Brownian motion.
CFMM pool. The state of a constant function market maker (CFMM) pool is characterized by
the reserves (x,y )∈ R2
+, which describe the current holdings of the pool in terms of the risky asset
and the numéraire, respectively. Define the feasible set of reservesC according to
C ≜{(x,y )∈ R2
+ : f(x,y ) =L},
where f : R2
+→ R is referred to as the bonding function or invariant, and L∈ R is a constant. In
other words, the feasible set is a level set of the bonding function. The pool is defined by a smart
contract which allows an agent to transition the pool reserves from the current state (x0,y 0)∈C
to any other point (x1,y 1)∈C in the feasible set, so long as the agent contributes the difference
(x1−x0,y 1−y0) into the pool; see Figure 1a.
Example 1. The constant product market maker is defined by the invariant√xy =L.
To simplify our analysis, we will also assume that, aside from trading with arriving liquidity
demanding agents, the pool is static otherwise. In particular, we assume that the liquidity providers
do not add (“mint”) or remove (“burn”) reserves over the time scale of our analysis. In other words,
LPs are passive. We also ignore the details of the underlying blockchain on which the pool operates.
In particular, we assume away any blockchain transaction fees such as “gas” fees, and also ignore
the discrete-time nature of block updates.
Besides liquidity providers, there are two kinds of agents in the model: arbitrageurs and noise
traders.
Arbitrageurs. There is a population of arbitrageurs, able to frictionlessly trade at the external
market price, continuously monitoring the CFMM pool. When an arbitrageur interacts with the
pool, we assume they maximize their immediate profit by exploiting any deviation from the external
market price. In other words, they transfer the pool to a point in the feasible set C that allows
them to extract maximum value assuming that they unwind their trade at the external market
price P. Geometrically, the presence of arbitrageurs implies that, if the price of the risky asset is
7Volatility will be an important input in the analysis that follows. A natural question is how to calibrate volatility as
a model parameter. As in the general application of Black-Scholes style models, forex ante analysis of a possible future
LP position, an implied volatility is the appropriate input. On the other hand, for ex post LP return performance
analysis as in Section 6, a historical or realized volatility is appropriate.
11

===== PAGE 12 =====

x1−x0
y0−y1
f(x,y ) =L
(x0,y 0)
(x1,y 1)
x
y
(a) Transitions between any two points on the bonding
curve f(x, y) = L are permitted, if an agent contributes
the difference into the pool.
f(x,y ) =L
slope =−P
(
x∗(P ),y ∗(P )
)
x
y
(b) Arbitrageurs ensures that, when the price isP, pool
reserves shift to the point on the bonding curve where
the slope is equal to −P.
Figure 1 : Illustration of a CFMM.
P, pool reserves will move to the point on the curve f (x,y ) = L where the slope of the bonding
curve is equal to−P, as indicated in Figure 1b.
Noise traders. There is also a population of DEX-specific noise traders. Noise traders trade only
in the CFMM pool, and trade for totally idiosyncratic reasons. In most models of equilibrium
liquidity provision on decentralized exchanges, it is important that there are at least some noise
traders who strictly prefer trading on CFMMs to CEXs, since these traders are the source, since the
equilibrium amount of CFMM liquidity is zero in the absence of noise traders [Lehar and Parlour,
2021]. There are many reasons in practice why certain market participants might prefer trading
on CFMMs to CEXs. Market participants may not be able or willing to satisfy the know-your-
customer requirements imposed by CEXs, or may not trust that centralized exchanges will safely
custody their assets. Market participants may, due to jurisdictional restrictions, not have access
to a CEX on which a particular asset trades, whereas DEXes have no jurisdictional restrictions;
market participants may also value the ability to atomically combine DEX trades with other smart
contract operations on blockchains.8
Noise traders’ trades have an initial impact on CFMM pool prices, but these effects are im-
mediately offset by arbitrageurs, who immediately move the CFMM back to the CEX price P.
Thus, from the LP’s perspective, noise traders simply contribute a flow of fees. Denote by FEET
8There could also be noise trading on the CEX; however, since we have assumed the CEX is infinitely deep, these
trades do not affect prices and can be ignored in our model. If there are noise traders who can trade on either the
CEX or the DEX, in our model they will choose to trade on the infinitely deep CEX. For the purposes of our model,
we only need that there are some noise traders who exogenously prefer to trade on the DEX, with strong enough
preferences that they are willing to use the DEX despite higher fees and price impact.
12

===== PAGE 13 =====

the cumulative fees paid by noise traders up to time T. For simplicity, we assume fees are paid in
units of the numéraire; this simplifies the analysis, since fees do not affect the level curve that the
CFMM trades on. 9 In practice, fees are sometimes (e.g., in Uniswap v2 but not in Uniswap v3)
reinvested into the pool reserves; another way to think about this assumption is to assume LPs
immediately withdraw any accrued fees from the CFMM.
When discussing arbitrageurs, we will distinguish between two conceptually different forms
of arbitrage activity. The first, which we call rebalancing arbitrage, is arbitrage of a pool when
mispricing arises due to movements of the CEX price. The second, which we callreversion arbitrage,
is arbitrage following the arrival of noise traders who move DEX prices away from P — this type
of arbitrage is sometimes called “back-running”. Our model allows us to quantify the magnitude of
profits of rebalancing arbitrageurs, but not reversion arbitrageurs.
3.1. Discussion of Assumptions
We assume the CEX is infinitely deep, so trades have no price impact; this is analogous to the
assumption in the Black-Scholes model that trades of the underlying stock have no price impact.
It is not entirely clear how true this is in practice, and for which assets this is true. On the one
hand, Barbon and Ranaldo [2021] and Liao and Robinson [2022] argue that transaction fees are in
fact lower on DEXs than CEXs at certain transaction sizes. Moreover, since the barriers to listing
tokens on DEXs are so low, many less liquid tokens begin trading on DEXs before they are traded
on large CEXs. On the other hand, a large majority of trade volume in the USD-ETH pair, around
90%, occurs on centralized exchanges relative to decentralized exchanges. Moreover, according to
our conversations with industry participants, large orders are in practice often executed through
OTC desks, so liquidity may be deeper than what is implied by CEX limit order books; the CEX in
our model can be thought of as capturing limit order books, OTC desks, and any other sources of
liquidity outside the DEX, including in fact other DEXes. Our model is a reasonable approximation
so long as any individual DEX does not constitute more than a small fraction of total liquidity in
the market available for an asset. Even in settings where this assumption does not hold, our model
may still be a useful conceptual benchmark that is cross-sectionally consistent and arbitrage-free,
analogous to the use of option pricing models to value options with illiquid underlying assets, such
9The same assumption is made by Lehar and Parlour [2021].
13

===== PAGE 14 =====

as employee stock options in privately held companies, or as in real options valuation [Dixit and
Pindyck, 1994].
A number of other papers, such as Lehar and Parlour [2021], Capponi and Jia [2021] Hasbrouck
et al. [2022], Barbon and Ranaldo [2021], and Foley et al. [2023], argue that the equilibrium level
of pool liquidity – L in our model – should equating LPs’ gains from trading fees to their losses
from “adverse selection.” We takeL as given, thinking of it as determined by such an equilibrium
process. We will show that L VRonly depends on price volatility, and the marginal liquidity of the
CFMM level set, both of which are observable objects. Thus, given price volatility, any model of
liquidity providers’ strategic behavior which leads the CFMM LP to reach a given level set implies
the same level ofL VR. The cost of not modeling strategic LP behavior is that our framework cannot
make sharp predictions about how the level of CFMM liquidity provision responds to changes in
market design. However, the benefit is that our quantification of CFMM LP losses is robust to
different underlying models of strategic LP behavior.
We assume away many frictions to trading which are present in practice: we assume arbitrageurs
pay no trading fees on CEXs or DEXs, we ignore gas fees, and we ignore the discrete, block-based
nature of trading on blockchain CFMMs. As in Black-Scholes, these approximations allow us to
derive particularly simple expressions for model outcomes. Accounting for fees will imply that the
profits arbitrageurs make will tend to be lower than our expressions. In particular, in practice,
arbitrageurs tend to engage in “gas races”, bidding high gas fees so that block miners have an
incentive to include their arbitrage trades in the blockchain first. These gas races will tend to
redirect some of the profits from CEX-DEX arbitrage towards block miners.10 We will show in our
empirical analysis of Section 6 that our model appears to match the actual delta-hedged returns of
LP positions from the data fairly closely, suggesting that the omission of fees from our model has a
quantitatively small effect on estimated LP returns in the examples we analyze. Moreover, we note
that the analysis of arbitrage profits in the presence of fees is the subject of follow-on work [Milionis
et al., 2023a], and we defer a more careful discussion of the impact of fees to that work. We also
assume noise trader fees are paid in the numéraire, and we assume away minting and burning of
LP shares for simplicity. However, we relax both these assumptions in the empirical application in
10CEX-DEX arbitrage is one form of “miner extractable value”, or MEV, a set of circumstances in which miners’
ability to determine the ordering of transactions allows them to extract monetary value; Daian et al. [2020] discusses
MEV in detail.
14

===== PAGE 15 =====

Section 6.
4. Loss-Versus-Rebalancing
We proceed to analyze losses of AMM LPs in the context of our model.
The pool value function V (P ). Figure 1b shows that the composition of the CFMM’s reserve pool
depends only on the risky asset’s price: at any time t, if the risky asset’s price is Pt, arbitrageurs
will move the pool’s reserves to the point on the f (x,y ) curve where the slope is−Pt. The mark-
to-market value of the pool’s reserves at any point in time,Ptxt +yt, is thus also fully determined
by the current price Pt. A convenient way to analyze the monetary value of pool reserves at any
given point in time is to define the the pool value function V : R+→ R+, as the solution to the
optimization problem:
V (P ) ≜ minimize
(x,y)∈R2
+
Px +y
subject to f(x,y ) =L.
(1)
The intuition behind (1) is that, at any point in time, arbitrageurs can access any point on the
invariant curve f(x,y ) = L; arbitrageur profits are maximized by minimizing the value of the
pool’s reserves. The minimizing choice of x,y is the tangency point illustrated in Figure 1b;V (P )
measures the monetary value of reserves, Px +y, at this minimal point. If we denote by Vt the
value of pool reserves at timet, the presence of arbitrageurs implies that at any point,Vt is equal to
V (Pt). Geometrically, the pool value function implicitly defines a reparameterization of the pool
state from primal coordinates (reserves) to dual coordinates (prices).
We assume that the pool value function satisfies:
Assumption 1. 1. An optimal solution
(
x∗(P ),y∗(P )
)
to the pool value optimization (1) exists
for every P≥ 0.
2. The pool value function V (·) is everywhere twice continuously differentiable.
3. For all t≥ 0,
EQ
[∫t
0
x∗(Ps)2σ2
sP 2
s ds
]
<∞.
Parts 1–2 are easily verified for many CFMMs, see Section 5 for examples. Part 3 is a square-
15

===== PAGE 16 =====

integrability condition that will be used in Section 4. Parts 1–2 are a sufficient condition for the
following:
Lemma 1. For all pricesP≥ 0, the pool value function satisfies:
1. V (P )≥ 0.
2. V′(P ) =x∗(P )≥ 0.
3. V′′(P ) =x∗′(P )≤ 0.
Proof. The first part follows from the fact thatC⊂ R2
+ andP≥ 0. The second part is the envelope
theorem or Danskin’s theorem [Bertsekas, 1971]. The third part follows from the concavity ofV (·),
as a pointwise minimum of a collection of affine functions. ■
Part 2 of Lemma 1 establishes that the slope of the pool value function is equal to the reserves in
the risky asset. Part 3 establishes that the pool value function is concave. Note that this concavity
does not depend on the nature of the feasible set C or the bonding function f(·). This part also
establishes that the second derivative of the pool value function is the marginal liquidity available
at the price level.
We callx∗(P ) the demand curve of the AMM. We remark that the concavity of the pool value
function along with Part 3 of Lemma 1 establish that the demand curves of all CFMMs must be
non-increasing functions of the implied pool price. This fact has deep economic roots, in that it is
fundamentally implied by and equivalent to Myerson’s lemma when LPs exchanging a risky asset
with traders is viewed as an auction for which incentive compatibility of traders reporting their
true valuations for the asset is required; this has been the subject of later investigations by Milionis
et al. [2024, 2023b], and the monotonicity of demand curves holds for and forms the basis of a
broader class of AMMs that are more general than CFMMs, and also include limit order books.
Remark 1. The setting we accommodate and rely on is that of a locally-smooth demand curve
x∗(P ). It is neither important nor required that this format comes from a CFMM, i.e., it is not
necessary for our results and L VRin particular that there is an invariant curve. So long as for
some (instantaneous) interval of time, the LP is committing to a fixed demand curve according to
Assumption 1, the definition and characterization ofL VRin Theorem 1 carries through precisely as-
is with no modification. For one example, this remark means that theL VRcalculation of Theorem 1
16

===== PAGE 17 =====

can be applied with absolutely no adjustments in general concentrated liquidity AMMs, such as
Uniswap v3 (in fact, see Example 4 and Example 5, where this is analyzed). This means that the
concept of loss-versus-rebalancing, as we present it hereby, applies for any AMM with a locally-
smooth demand curve x∗(P ). Therefore, L VRdoes not only refer to and is not a quantity specific
to CFMMs; L VRcharacterizes the behavior of general AMMs; also refer to Footnote 18 for how to
apply this to even more general, non-locally-smooth settings.
Note also that the optimization problem in (1) is isomorphic to the expenditure minimization
problem from classical demand theory: under price P, a consumer minimizes total expenditures
Px +y, subject to staying on the indifference curve f(x,y ) = L. The solution to this problem is
to choose the point where the level curve of f (x,y ) is tangent to the budget set. The envelope
theorem thus gives that the first derivative of the expenditure function is the Hicksian demand
function, which is isomorphic to x∗(P ), and the second derivative of the expenditure function is
the slope of Hicksian demand.
The pool value function allows us to write the profit and loss of an CFMM, from time0 to time
t, as:
LP P&Lt =Vt−V0 + FEEt. (2)
In words, LP P&Lt is the monetary value of the pool reserves at timet, minus the value at time 0,
plus the cumulative fees collected until timet.
Rebalancing strategy Rt. The key idea of our paper is to decompose the change in pool value
Vt−V0 into the sum of the returns on a particular trading strategy, which we call the rebalancing
strategy, and a residual term. Informally, the rebalancing strategy aims to hold exactly the same
amount of the risky asset as the CFMM at any point in time. Whenever prices move in a way which
causes the CFMM to buy or sell, the rebalancing strategy makes exactly the same buys and sells;
however, the rebalancing strategy executes these trades at CEX prices, rather than CFMM prices.
An alternative way to think of the rebalancing strategy is that it aims to replicate the exposure
of the CFMM to the risky asset at any point in time. Thus, taking a long position in the CFMM
LP, and a short position in the rebalancing strategy, delta-hedges the LP position, neutralizing
first-order exposure to shifts in the risky asset’s price.
We first define general trading strategies. A trading strategy is a process (xt,yt) defining
17

===== PAGE 18 =====

holdings in the risky asset and numéraire at each time t. For a trading strategy to be admissible,
we require that it be adapted, predictable, and satisfy
EQ
[∫t
0
x2
sσ2
sP 2
s ds
]
<∞, ∀ t≥ 0. (3)
We further restrict admissible trading strategies to be self-financing, i.e., to satisfy
xtPt +yt− (x0P0 +y0)  
P&Lt
=
∫t
0
xsdPs, ∀ t≥ 0. (4)
Equation (4) states that the change in the profit of the strategy in a small period of time is equal
to the holdings of the risky asset,xs, times the change in price,dPs. The total P&L of the strategy
is just the integral of these instantaneous changes. Intuitively, a self-financing strategy executes all
rebalancing trades at market prices; hence, trades do not affect the profit of the strategy, and no
money needs to be injected into the trading strategy. In the special case where Pt is a martingale,
so the expected profit from holding the risky asset is zero, any self-financing strategy makes zero
profits in expectation, since any strategy which dynamically trades a asset with zero expected
returns also has zero expected returns.11
The self-financing condition implies that, if we specify y0, the initial amount of the numéraire,
and{xt}t≥0 the amount of the risky asset that is held in any possible future history, the future path
of the numéraire{yt} is implicitly determined through (4). The P&L of the resulting self-financing
strategy can be directly expressed in terms of{xt}, via the right side of (4). Intuitively, the right
side of (4) is the integrated form of the envelope formula: if the trading strategy holds a position
xt in the risky asset, the change in profits in an instant dt is xtdPt, the amount of the risky asset
held times the change in price. Note that, sincePt is a Q-martingale, the P&L process given by (4)
is also Q-martingale, and by (3) it is square-integrable.
We then define the rebalancing strategy to be the self-financing trading that starts initially
holding
(
x∗(P0),y∗(P0)
)
(the same position as the CFMM), and continuously and frictionlessly
rebalances to maintain a position in the risky asset given by xt ≜ x∗(Pt). Let Rt denote the
11In the general case, the risky asset may have positive expected returns due to risk premia; self-financing strategies
may thus have positive expected profits, proportional to how much portfolio weight they put on the risky asset.
However, the positive expected returns of the strategy derive only from the risk premia on the underlying asset: if
the strategy is delta-hedged, it makes zero expected profits.
18

===== PAGE 19 =====

monetary value of the rebalancing strategy at timet; that is, if the rebalancing strategy holdsxt,yt
at time t, Rt is Ptxt +yt. Applying the self-financing condition (4) the rebalancing portfolio has
value:
Rt =V0 +
∫t
0
x∗(Ps)dPs, ∀ t≥ 0. (5)
Because of Assumption 1 Part 3, the rebalancing strategy is admissible andRt is a square-integrable
Q-martingale. In particular, being a self-financing strategy, the rebalancing strategy breaks even
in expectation under the risk-neutral measure Q; it only makes expected returns to the extent that
the underlying risky asset has nonzero risk premia.
As a matter of accounting, we then express the change in pool value from time 0 to time
t as the sum of the rebalancing strategy’s profits, and a residual term which we will define as
loss-versus-rebalancing:
Vt−V0 = (Rt−V0)− L VRt,
L VRt ≜Rt−Vt. (6)
L VRt can also be thought of as the losses from a delta-hedged LP position, ignoring fees. In other
words, a strategy which takes a long position in the CFMM LP position, and a short position in the
rebalancing strategy, paysVt−Rt at timet, disregarding any fees collected. The core contribution
of our paper is the characterization of L VRt in the following theorem.
Theorem 1. Loss-versus-rebalancing takes the form:
L VRt =
∫t
0
ℓ(σs,Ps)ds, ∀ t≥ 0, (7)
where we define, forP≥ 0, the instantaneous L VRby:
ℓ(σ,P ) ≜ σ2P 2
2
⏐⏐x∗′ (P )
⏐⏐≥ 0. (8)
ℓ(σ,P ) is always positive, so L VRis a non-negative, non-decreasing, and predictable process. More-
over, the cumulative profits of rebalancing arbitrageurs up to timet is equal to L VRt.
Comparative statics. The core intuition behind Theorem 1, which we will demonstrate below,
19

===== PAGE 20 =====

is that the CFMM systematically loses money relative to the rebalancing strategy due to price
slippage: every trade made by the CFMM is made at slightly worse prices than the rebalancing
strategy. Equation (8) of Theorem 1 characterizes these losses: L VRis large when volatility σt is
high, so price move more; and when|x∗′ (Pt)| is large, so the CFMM trades more of the risky asset
when prices move a given amount. We will refer to|x∗′ (Pt)| as the marginal liquidity of the CFMM
at pricePt. In Appendix A.2, we derive an expression for|x∗′ (P )| in terms of the CFMM bonding
function f(·), and show that|x∗′ (P )| is related to the curvature of the level sets of f(·): CFMMs
with “flatter” bonding curves have higher marginal liquidity.12
The idea that the losses of CFMM LP positions are related to volatility and curvature are not
new to the financial economics literature [Aoyagi, 2020, Aoyagi and Ito, 2021, Lehar and Parlour,
2021, Capponi and Jia, 2021, O’Neill, 2022]. Our contribution is to build a model which, like the
Black-Scholes model for option prices, both delivers qualitative comparative statics, and is also
quantitatively realistic enough to be used to measure CFMM losses in practice.
Intuition: price slippage. A rigorous proof thatL VRis equal to (12), and that rebalancing arbitrage
profits are equal toL VR, is contained in Appendix A. Here, we present an intuitive derivation, based
on Figure 2.
Suppose the market price changes fromPt toPt+dPt. Arbitrageurs thus trade with the CFMM,
moving from pointA to pointB on the CFMM invariant curve. Letdxt denote the amount of the
risky asset sold, indicated by the green horizontal line. When the price moves fromPt toPt +dPt,
the rebalancing strategy sells exactly the same amount,dxt, of the risky asset as the CFMM does.
However, the rebalancing strategy trades at the CEX price,Pt +dPt; it trades along the the brown
line of slope Pt +dPt passing through A, reaching point B∗, which is higher than point B. Thus,
after prices move, the LP position and the rebalancing strategy hold the same amount of the risky
asset, but the rebalancing strategy holds more cash. The gap is equal to the height of the line
connecting B and B∗.
To calculate the height of theB−B∗ line, note that the rebalancing strategy trades at the slope
of the brown line, which is Pt +dPt. The CFMM trades at the slope of the purple line — that is,
12An interesting implication of these results for the design of CFMM invariants is that, in our model, under our
assumptions, the only feature of CFMMs which matters for losses is the curvature of the CFMM bonding function,
which determines x∗′ (P ). Any two CFMM invariants for an asset pair which have the same local convexity at any
given price have the same L VR.
20

===== PAGE 21 =====

A
B
B
∗
P t
P t + dP t
dx t
Figure 2 : L VRand a stylized depiction of CFMM LP price slippage. Suppose prices begin at Pt, the
slope of the red line; the CFMM reserves then begin at pointA. If prices increase toPt +dPt, the slope
of the brown line, the CFMM trades to point B. The rebalancing strategy trades instead at the price
Pt +dPt, to point B∗. L VRis the vertical gap betweenB and B∗.
the secant line connecting pointsA andB. Since the tangency lines at pointsA andB have slopes
Pt and Pt +dPt respectively, the secant line has slopePt + dPt
2 . Thus, the B−B∗ line has height:
dxt×
(
(Pt +dPt)−
(
Pt + dPt
2
))
= dxtdPt
2 . (9)
This is thus the loss of the CFMM, relative to the rebalancing strategy. This is also exactly the
profit extracted by arbitrageurs when prices move: arbitrageurs purchase quantity dxt from the
CFMM at pricePt + dPt
2 , and selling to the CEX at pricePt +dPt, thus earning a profit of dxtdPt
2 .
Next, we write the amount tradeddxt as a function of dPt:
dxt =
⏐⏐⏐⏐
dx∗(P )
dP
⏐⏐⏐⏐dPt =
⏐⏐x∗′ (Pt)
⏐⏐dPt, (10)
where x∗ (Pt) is the demand function of the CFMM. Expression (9) then becomes:
dxtdPt
2 =
⏐⏐x∗′ (Pt)
⏐⏐(dPt)2
2 . (11)
21

===== PAGE 22 =====

Now, for a geometric Brownian motion, in a small amount of time dt, the quadratic variation
(dPt)2 = d[Pt] is equal to σ2
tP 2
t dt, that is, the instantaneous variance σ2
t dt multiplied by the
square of the price. Hence, plugging in to (11), in any instant of time dt, the CFMM LP position
loses:
⏐⏐x∗′ (Pt)
⏐⏐σ2
tP 2
t
2 dt. (12)
This is (8) of Theorem 1.
Figure 2 thus illustrates thatL VR— that is, the losses CFMMs incur relative to the rebalancing
strategy — arises entirely fromprice slippage. The fact that CFMMs rebalance, selling when prices
rise and buying when prices fall, is not in itself the source of losses. The rebalancing strategy
makes exactly the same trades of the risky asset as the CFMM LP position, but does not lose
money because it executes all trades at CEX prices. For that matter, any trading strategy which
executes all trades at CEX prices exactly breaks even under the risk-neutral measure. L VRarises
from the fact that CFMMs execute all trades at worse-than-market prices.
Price slippage is intrinsic to the design of CFMMs. CFMMs are fully passive liquidity providers,
making markets for risky assets without access to external price feeds from centralized exchanges.
CFMMs rely on arbitrage to “inform” them about current market prices: whenever CEX prices
move, the CFMM’s quotes become “stale”, offering to trade some quantity of the risky asset at
better-than-market prices. Arbitrageurs trade the CFMM against the CEX until the CFMM’s price
is equal to the CEX price, and these profitable trades are exhausted. In other words, the slippage
built into CFMM design is what gives arbitrageurs the incentive to align CFMM prices with CEX
prices.
Relationship to high-frequency trading models. Our work is related to models of “quote sniping”
in high-frequency trading. Budish et al. [2015] analyzes a model in which, whenever prices move,
bid-ask quotes become “stale”, creating a speed race between the quoting market maker to update
her quotes, and arbitrageurs to “snipe” the stale quote. In these models, purely public information
creates “informed-trader” risk, because arbitrageurs occasionally win speed races and are able to act
on public information before the quoting market maker can. In relation to these models, CFMMs
can be thought of like quoting market makers that, by design, never update prices proactively. An
CFMM only ever increases its quoted price when it receives orders to buy the risky asset; in other
22

===== PAGE 23 =====

words, CFMMs’ price quotes only ever move when they are sniped. Thus, any movement in CEX
prices causes CFMM quotes to become stale, creating a speed race to snipe the CFMM. CFMMs
always lose these races, and loss-versus-rebalancing consists of the cumulative losses LPs suffer from
getting “sniped” to trade at worse-than-market prices. One technical difference from the setting
of Budish et al. [2015] is that, in the present paper, asset price innovations are purely diffusive, as
opposed to arriving at discrete instances (i.e., jumps).
Volatility versus informed trading. Our results are reminiscent of classic results in market mi-
crostructure, which state that market makers charge fees to make up for losses from adverse se-
lection. However, the literature on AMMs have analyzed two slightly different narratives for the
source of the adverse selection CFMM LPs face. The first, reminiscent of microstructure models
such as Glosten and Milgrom [1985], is that LPs lose money when traders with knowledge of fu-
ture market prices trade with the CFMM, creating “wrong-way” risk. This channel is often called
“informed trading”. The second, which we focus on in this paper, is that LPs lose money when
traders with knowledge of current market prices on the CEX snipe the CFMM LP. We will refer
to this channel as “volatility” or “slippage”.
In our model, the losses of CFMM LPs arise entirely from the latter “slippage” effect. Slippage
is straightforwards to quantify, because it depends on easily measurable objects: the volatility
of CEX price movements, and the CFMM’s marginal utility. A number of recent papers in the
financial economics literature have pointed out qualitatively that CFMM losses are linked to the
volatility of the underlying asset; our contribution relative to these papers is to is to show that
this relationship can be quantified, under exactly the canonical Black-Scholes model of risky asset
prices.13 Informed trading is more difficult to quantify in practice, since it requires estimating the
extent to which order flow tends to be informative about future price movements. In the context of
our model, since we assumed the CEX is infinitely deep, informed traders would only trade on the
CEX, since they have lower price impact. Thus, in our model, informed trading does not directly
contribute to adverse selection losses to CFMM LPs.
Decomposing LP P&L. Next, we plug the L VRexpression into (2), to decompose the P&L of the
13Outside of the finance literature, some earlier papers in the crypto literature have derived related quantification
results, such as Angeris et al. [2020]. Our contribution relative to this literature is to construct a clean “rebalancing
strategy” benchmark, and to link these results to ideas about adverse selection in market making.
23

===== PAGE 24 =====

LP position into three components,
LP P&Lt = FEEt
accumulated fees
+ Vt−V0
change in pool
reserve value
=
∫t
0
x∗(Ps)dPs
 
market risk
+ FEEt− L VRt 
fees minus L VR
(13)
The right side of expression (13) decomposes the profit of an CFMM LP position, from time 0 to
timet, into three components. The first is “market risk”, which from (5) is exactly the P&L of the
rebalancing strategy. The CFMM is long the risky asset; hence, at any given point in time, it accrues
gains and losses when the risky asset’s price fluctuates. However, market risk contributes nothing
to the CFMM’s profits under the risk-neutral measure; equivalently, the market risk component of
the CFMM’s profits can be costlessly hedged, simply by shorting however much of the underlying
asset the CFMM holds at any point in time, as the rebalancing strategy does. Besides market risk,
CFMM LP positions attain positive returns from the strictly increasing processFEEt, and negative
returns from the strictly decreasing process−L VRt.
The Black-Scholes framework for classic options indicates that the directional risk exposure
of options can be hedged, simply by taking positions in the underlying asset. Option market
makers use this principle in practice, delta-hedging the directional risk of their options portfolios,
and profiting from collecting bid-ask spreads and betting on differences between realized volatility
and the volatility implied by option prices. Analogous to this, the decomposition in (13) also
corresponds to a tradable strategy: one can delta-hedge CFMM LP positions, simply by combining
a long position in the CFMM LP with a short position in the rebalancing strategy. The time- t
payoff of the long-LP, short-rebalancing-strategy position is:
delta-hedged LP P&Lt = LP P&Lt− (Rt−V0) = FEEt− L VRt 
fees minus L VR
. (14)
Intuitively, the delta-hedged LP position is always short as much ETH in the rebalancing strategy
as it is long in the LP position, and is thus insulated against directional movements in ETH prices.
This is thus a pure bet on whether fees are large enough to offset losses from slippage. Delta-hedging
a CFMM LP position is particularly simple because it only requires shorting the amount of ETH
held by the risky asset.14 In particular, while we have framed our analysis from the perspective of a
14In contrast, for example, standard European or American options cannot be delta-hedged in a model-free way:
24

===== PAGE 25 =====

single liquidity provider who holds the entire CFMM LP position, an individual liquidity provider
can hedge her own LP position by shorting as much ETH as her individual position currently holds,
that is, the amount of ETH she would receive if she burned her LP position, at any point in time.
The individual does not need to keep track of any mints and burns by other LPs, since these events
do not change the quantity of ETH held in her LP position.
5. Examples
In this section, we calculate L VRfor a number of specific CFMM examples.
Example 2 (Weighted Geometric Mean Market Maker / Balancer) . Consider the bonding function
f(x,y ) ≜ xθy1−θ, for θ∈ (0, 1). Solving the pool value optimization (1) allows us to obtain the
closed-form optimal solutions
x∗(P ) =L
( θ
1−θ
1
P
)1−θ
, y ∗(P ) =L
(1−θ
θ P
)θ
.
Then,
V (P ) = L
θθ(1−θ)1−θPθ, V ′′(P ) =x∗′(P ) =−Lθ1−θ(1−θ)θ 1
P 2−θ,
and
ℓ(σ,P ) = σ2
2 θ(1−θ)V (P ).
The weighted geometric mean market maker generalizes the constant product market maker.
For these market makers, the instantaneousL VRnormalized per dollar of pool reserves is constant,
i.e.,
ℓ(σ,P )
V (P ) = σ2
2 θ(1−θ). (15)
In fact, with a minor caveat, weighted geometric market makers are theonly CFMMs for which this
is true. We discuss this in Appendix B.2. Finally, observe that L VRis maximized when θ = 1/2,
and goes to zero as θ→{ 0, 1}.15
Example 3 (Constant Product Market Maker / Uniswap v2) . Takingθ = 1/2 in Example 2, we have
in the Black-Scholes framework, the delta of an option depends on volatility and other parameters.
15See also Proposition 1 of Evans [2020], evaluating a weighted geometric mean market maker over a finite horizon
using risk-neutral pricing.
25

===== PAGE 26 =====

that
V (P ) = 2L
√
P, ℓ (σ,P ) = Lσ2
4
√
P, ℓ(σ,P )
V (P ) = σ2
8 . (16)
This example shows that the constant product market maker admits particularly simple ex-
pressions for L VR: ℓ(σ,P )/V (P ), the loss per unit time as a fraction of mark-to-market pool value,
is simply 1/8 times the instantaneous variance. This formula is straightforward to apply empiri-
cally: for example, if the ETH-USDC volatility is σ = 5% (daily), this formula implies that the
ETH-USDC LP pool loses approximately σ2/8 = 3.125 (bp) in pool value to L VRdaily.
Example 4 (Uniswap v3 Range Order) . Given liquidity parameter L≥ 0 and prices in the given
range [Pa,Pb), consider the bonding function of the “range order” Adams et al. [2021],
f(x,y ) ≜
(
x +L/
√
Pb
)1/2(
y +L
√
Pa
)1/2
.
Solving the pool value optimization (1),
x∗(P ) =L
( 1√
P
− 1√Pb
)
, y ∗(P ) =L
(√
P−
√
Pa
)
.
Then, for P∈ (Pa,Pb),
V (P ) =L
(
2
√
P−P/
√
Pb−
√
Pa
)
, V ′′(P ) =x∗′(P ) =− L
2P 3/2,
so that
ℓ(σ,P ) = Lσ2
4
√
P.
Observe that the instantaneous L VRis the same in Example 3. However, the pool value V (P )
is lower. Indeed V (P )→ 0 if Pa↑P and Pb↓P, so
lim
Pa→P
Pb→P
ℓ(σ,P )
V (P ) = +∞,
i.e., the instantaneous L VRper dollar of pool reserves can be arbitrarily high in this case, if the liq-
uidity range is sufficiently narrow. This is consistent with the idea that range orders “concentrate”
liquidity.
26

===== PAGE 27 =====

Example 5 (Uniswap v3 Pool) . A “concentrated liquidity” pool such as Uniswap v3 [Adams et al.,
2021] aggregates the liquidity across a set of range orders i = 1,...,N , where order i is a range
order with liquidity Li over range16 [P (i)
a ,P (i)
b ). Following Example 4, for each order i, we have
that
x∗
i (P ) =



Li

 1√
P (i)
a
− 1√
P (i)
b

, if P <P (i)
a ,
Li

 1√
P
− 1√
P (i)
b

, if P∈ [P (i)
a ,P (i)
b ),
0, if P≥P (i)
b ,
(17)
y∗
i (P ) =



0, if P <P (i)
a ,
Li
(√
P−
√
P (i)
a
)
, if P∈ [P (i)
a ,P (i)
b ),
Li
(√
P (i)
b −
√
P (i)
a
)
, if P≥P (i)
b ,
(18)
Vi(P ) =



Li

 1√
P (i)
a
− 1√
P (i)
b

P, if P <P (i)
a ,
Li
(
2
√
P−P/
√
P (i)
b −
√
P (i)
a
)
, if P∈ [P (i)
a ,P (i)
b ),
Li
(√
P (i)
b −
√
P (i)
a
)
, if P≥P (i)
b ,
(19)
V′′
i (P ) =x∗′
i (P ) =



− 1
2LiP−3/2, if P∈ [P (i)
a ,P (i)
b ),
0, otherwise.
(20)
The aggregate reserves and pool value are given by [see Milionis et al., 2023b]
x∗(P ) =
N∑
i=1
x∗
i (P ), y ∗(P ) =
N∑
i=1
y∗
i (P ), V (P ) =
N∑
i=1
Vi(P ).
When we compute (instantaneous) L VR, we need marginal liquidityV′′(P ) =x∗′(P ). Observe from
(20) that V′′
i (P ) is zero when order i is not in-range, i.e., when P /∈ [P (i)
a ,P (i)
b ). Hence, only
16In addition, the endpoints of each price range may be constrained to predefined endpoints or “ticks”.
27

===== PAGE 28 =====

in-range orders contribute to L VR, i.e.,
ℓ(σ,P ) =−σ2P 2
2 V′′(P ) =−σ2P 2
2
∑
i=1
V′′
i (P ) = σ2
4
√
P×
N∑
i=1
Li1{
P∈[P (i)
a ,P (i)
b )
}
  
≜¯L(P )
.
The quantity ¯L(P ) is the aggregate in-range liquidity, given the current price P. From the
perspective of the set of range orders which comprises the pool, this is a sufficient statistic for
computing L VR.
Example 6 (Linear Market Maker / Limit Order) . ForK >0, consider the linear bonding function
f(x,y ) ≜Kx +y. Solving the pool value optimization (1),
x∗(P ) =



L/K if P <K,
0 if P≥K,
y∗(P ) =



0 if P <K,
L if P≥K.
Hence, this pool can be viewed as similar to a resting limit order17 that is, depending on the relative
value of the pricePt versus limit priceK, either an order to buy (ifPt≥K) or an order to sell (if
Pt<K ) up to L/K units of the risky asset at priceK. In this case,
V (P ) =L min{P/K, 1}.
Observe that V (·) does not satisfy the smoothness requirement of Assumption 1 Part 2: the first
derivative is discontinuous at the limit priceP =K. Thus, the characterization of Theorem 1 does
not apply.18
17While the linear market maker is statically identical to a resting limit order, observe that they are dynamically
different. In particular, once the price level K is crossed, in a traditional LOB, the limit order is filled and removed
from the order book. With a linear market maker, the order remains in the pool at the same price and quantity, but
with opposite direction. This merely refers to a superficial change of the default strategy after a trade execution.
18Note that the pool value function remains concave and the pool value process is a super-martingale. Hence, from
the Doob-Meyer decomposition, a non-negative monotonic running cost process (analogous to L VR) exists. However,
this process is not described by (7)–(8). Instead, it can be constructed using the concept of “local time” and the
Itô-Tanaka-Meyer formula, but we will not pursue such a generalization here [see, e.g., Carr and Jarrow, 1990].
28

===== PAGE 29 =====

6. Empirical Analysis
Next, we bring our model to data. This section has two goals. First, we illustrate that our ana-
lytical expressions for L VR, in practice, are nearly equal to the returns from a “delta-hedged LPing
strategy” which takes a long position in the CFMM LP, and a short position in the rebalancing
strategy. Second, we show that hedged LPing is dramatically less risky than unhedged LPing: ac-
counting for the rebalancing strategy’s profits decreases the standard deviation of daily LP returns
by a factor of almost 20.
Repeating (14), we have
LP P&Lt−
∫t
0
x∗(Ps)dPs
  
delta-hedged LP P&L
= FEEt− L VRt 
fees minus L VR
. (21)
The left side of (21) can be thought of as theP&L from a delta-hedged LP position: the P&L of the
LP position, minus that of the rebalancing strategy. This quantity can be estimated empirically
under very weak assumptions. The profits of the rebalancing strategy are simply the returns on a
portfolio which holds just as much of the risky asset as the LP position holds at any point in time,
adjusting holdings always at market prices. This quantity is simple to calculate for any CFMM, at
arbitrarily high frequency, since the entire history of the amount of each asset held by any CFMM
is generally publicly available on the blockchain; moreover, since only asset holdings are needed,
this procedure can be applied regardless of the specific bonding used by the CFMM. The P&L of
an LP position over any period of time can be calculated simply as the mark-to-market value of
pool reserves, at CEX prices at the start and end of the time period, accounting for mints, burns,
swaps, and trading fees.19
The right side of (21) can be thought of as our model’s prediction for the delta-hedgedP&L, i.e.,
left side of (21). The first term on the right side corresponds to trading fees, which are observable.
The second term is L VR, which we can measure as a function of realized volatility using expressions
(7) and (8) of Theorem 1. In this way, the degree to which the right side of (21) is close to the left
19Note that delta-hedging an LP position does not incur any flow gas costs, since simply holding an LP position in
a CFMM, without doing any minting or burning, does not require spending any gas. Thus, compared to executing
this trading strategy in practice over a fixed time period, the only fees that the left side of (21) does not account
for are the transaction fees from executing the rebalancing strategy on a CEX; any financing costs for maintaining a
short position on a CEX; and two one-time gas costs, for minting an LP position at the start of the period and then
burning it at the end of the period.
29

===== PAGE 30 =====

side measures the effectiveness of L VRin quantifying LP returns.
We bring the model to data using the WETH-USDC trading pair20 on Uniswap v2 for the period
from August 1, 2021 to July 31, 2022. Details of the data sources we use, and how we measure
various quantities, are described in Appendix C. Essentially, to measure the left side of (21), we
measure the P&L of an LP position simply as the mark-to-market value of pool reserves, periodically
valuing “mints” and “burns” — that is, tokens withdrawn or deposited from the LP position — at
market prices. We measure the profits of the rebalancing strategy simply by rebalancing to match
the CFMM LP holdings at a number of different discrete time frequencies. For example, suppose we
rebalance each minute, and suppose we observe that the CFMM LP position holds 10,000 ETH at
12:01am on January 1st, 2022. The rebalancing strategy then holds 10,000 ETH at 12:01am, so the
P&L of the rebalancing strategy from 12:01am to 12:02am is simply 10, 000 (P12:02am−P12:01am),
the amount of ETH held times the change in ETH prices over the next minute. In general, if the
rebalancing strategy holdsxRB
t of the risky asset at timet until timet + ∆t, then ∆RB P&Lt, the
rebalancing strategy’s net profit from period t to t + ∆t, is:
∆RB P&Lt =xRB
t (Pt+∆t−Pt). (22)
Expression (22) is the discrete-time analog of the envelope formula expression, (5), for the returns
on any strategy which trades at market prices. Note that ∆RB P&Lt is not directly affected by
rebalancing trades – changes inxRB
t over time – because these rebalancing trades are made at fair
market prices on the CEX, and we assumed CEX trades have no price impact. We calculate total
profits of the rebalancing strategy over any time period by summing the increments (22) over time.
As we will show below, our results are relatively insensitive to the rebalancing horizon chosen.
To measure the right side of (21), we observe FEEt, fees paid into the LP pool over any given
time period. 21 For L VRt, since Uniswap v2 is a constant-product CFMM, percentage L VRhas the
particularly simple expression in (16) of Example 3,
L VRt =
∫t
0
σ2
s
8 ×V (Ps)ds. (23)
20“WETH”, or “wrapped ETH” is a variation of ETH that is compliant with the ERC-20 token standard. For our
purposes, we will view ETH and WETH as equivalent.
21Uniswap v2 also allows for assets to be borrowed for “flash loans” for a fee; however, in v2, these loans are
accounted for as swaps, thus FEEt contains revenue from flash loans. We discuss this briefly in Appendix C.1.
30

===== PAGE 31 =====

We measure L VRin each period simply by plugging in realized volatility and pool value to a version
of equation (23) that is discretized over time.
Note that, empirically, we measure the total fees paid by all kinds of traders. This differs slightly
from our model, where we assume arbitrage traders pay no fees. Practically, since fees are simply
an increasing process which potentially compensates forL VR, whether fees arise from noise trade or
arbitrage trade does not substantially impact the returns on LP positions. If we assumed arbitrage
traders paid trading fees in the model, this would decrease the amount of arbitrage: instead of
prices on the CFMM moving immediately to match CEX prices at all times, prices would have
to move more than fees in order for arbitrage trade to have nonnegative payoffs. The analysis of
arbitrage profits in the presence of fees is the subject of follow-on work [Milionis et al., 2023a].
Markouts. Industry participants have recently begun using a “markouts” approach to evaluate
CFMM LP P&L [see, e.g., CrocSwap, 2022]. Markouts essentially attribute profits to trades by
comparing the price of each trade to a future price, usually at some fixed time offset from the trade
(e.g., 10 minutes) either from a CEX, or the CFMM itself. However, delta-hedging and the markout
approach are in a sense closely related: theP&L of delta-hedged LPing, when rebalanced at discrete
periods, turns out to be exactly equivalent to markout profits, marked to CEX prices at the end of
discrete periods of the same frequency. In other words, the main difference between delta-hedging
and markout analysis is whether the marking price is obtained in a fixed offset of time in the future
after a trade, or based on the ending price of the interval the trade was contained in. These two
are likely to be very close, especially when the markout offset or delta-hedging interval are short.
Thus, delta-hedged LPing can be thought of as a microfoundation for markout-style analysis.
6.1. Empirical Results
The daily realized volatility estimates are illustrated in Figure 3. Here, it is clear that, not only is
the volatility of this asset pair high, but the volatility in turn is also highly volatile, varying by a
factor of five over the observation interval.
In Figure 4, we see the daily average aggregate value for this pool over the time period. The
average pool value was $209 million, and the pool value ranged between $90 million and $310
million.
31

===== PAGE 32 =====

2021-08 2021-09 2021-10 2021-11 2021-12 2022-01 2022-022022-03 2022-04 2022-05 2022-06 2022-07 2022-08
0.0%
2.5%
5.0%
7.5%
10.0%
12.5%
15.0%
17.5%
20.0%
realized volatility (%, daily, 60min samples)
realized volatility
Figure 3 : Daily realized volatility for the ETH-USDC pair, computed from Binance minutely closing
prices, sampled at 60 minute intervals.
2021-08 2021-09 2021-10 2021-11 2021-12 2022-01 2022-022022-03 2022-04 2022-05 2022-06 2022-07 2022-08
0M
50M
100M
150M
200M
250M
300M
350M
total pool value (USDC, millions)
pool_value
Figure 4 : The daily average pool value of the Uniswap v2 WETH-USDC pair.
32

===== PAGE 33 =====

Next, we show why it is important to account for the profits of the rebalancing strategy in
analyzing LP returns. The pool_pnl series in Figure 5a shows the raw aggregate LP P&Lt (i.e.,
without delta-hedging by subtracting the rebalancing strategy). The pool P&L fluctuates wildly,
and ultimately loses money. In particular, as shown in Table 1, the pool has an overall annualized
return of−6.20%, and a Sharpe ratio of−0.15.
However, these returns are largely driven by market risk: at any point in time, the pool
maintains half of its value in ETH, and ETH prices varied significantly over this interval. The
hedged_pnl series in Figure 5 illustrate hedged P&L, that is, LP P&Lt minus the profits of the
rebalancing strategy, which is the left side of (21). This hedges directional exposure to ETH prices
to first-order, and is just a bet on whether fees are greater than L VR.
Visually, these lines are substantially less volatile than the raw LP P&Lt. This is quantified in
Table 1, where we see that a delta-hedged LP position can achieve very low standard deviation of
returns and high Sharpe ratios, and that, in general, standard deviations of returns decrease and
Sharpe ratios increase with more frequent rebalancing. Moreover, the delta-hedged LP position
actually makes positive returns, though this finding is specific to the setting we study here: in
general, delta-hedged returns may be higher or lower than unhedged returns.22 From the perspective
of individual investors, suppose a hypothetical market participant minted a small LP position at
the start of our sample period (ignoring gas fees), immediately delta-hedged the position on a
CEX, and costlessly updated her delta-hedge at various time horizons. If we value the market
participant’s position at the CEX price of ETH at any point in time, our results imply that the
market participant would have attained a Sharpe ratios between 1.75 and 23.33, depending on the
rebalancing frequency.
Accuracy of the model. In Figure 6, we analyze the accuracy of our model, that is, the difference
between the left and right sides of (21), for various choices of frequency of rebalancing. This analyzes
how well our model is able to predict delta-hedged LP returns in the data. Fees minus L VRin our
model tracks the pattern of hedged LP P&L: differences between the two seem to be stationary
over the observed interval. Moreover, in general, as the frequency of rebalancing increases, the
differences are smaller in magnitude. This is consistent withL VRas being a continuous rebalancing
approximation.
22Note that these returns assume no trading or financing costs for the rebalancing strategy.
33

===== PAGE 34 =====

2021-08 2021-09 2021-10 2021-11 2021-12 2022-01 2022-022022-03 2022-04 2022-05 2022-06 2022-07 2022-08
-40M
-20M
0M
20M
40M
60M
80M
cumulative P&L (USDC, millions)
pool_pnl
hedged_pnl_1D
hedged_pnl_4H
hedged_pnl_1H
hedged_pnl_5min
hedged_pnl_1min
fees_minus_lvr_pnl
(a) Including the aggregate pool P&L series.
2021-08 2021-09 2021-10 2021-11 2021-12 2022-01 2022-022022-03 2022-04 2022-05 2022-06 2022-07 2022-08
-5M
0M
5M
10M
15M
20M
cumulative P&L (USDC, millions)
hedged_pnl_1D
hedged_pnl_4H
hedged_pnl_1H
hedged_pnl_5min
hedged_pnl_1min
fees_minus_lvr_pnl
(b) Excluding the aggregate pool P&L series.
Figure 5: Cumulative pool P&L, delta-hedged P&L, and predictedP&L from our expressions forL VR, for
the Uniswap v2 WETH-USDC trading pair. In the first panel, the pool_pnl series shows the raw P&L
of the LP position. In both panels, the various hedged_pnl series show delta-hedged LP P&L, that is,
the P&L from a long position in the pool, and a short position in the rebalancing strategy, rebalanced at
various frequencies (daily, every four hours, every hour, every five minutes). Thefees_minus_lvr_pnl
series shows fees minus L VR, this is the delta-hedged P&L predicted by our theory. The data source for
prices is Binance, and LP P&L is calculated using data on Uniswap trades, mints, and burns from the
Ethereum blockchain. Details of how we calculate these quantities are in Appendix C.
34

===== PAGE 35 =====

avg return stdev return Sharpe ratio
(%, annual) (%, annual) (annual)
pool_pnl -6.20 42.08 -0.15
hedged_pnl_1D 5.04 2.87 1.75
hedged_pnl_4H 8.21 1.50 5.47
hedged_pnl_1H 9.75 0.90 10.81
hedged_pnl_5min 8.45 0.57 18.16
hedged_pnl_1min 9.04 0.39 23.33
fees_minus_lvr_pnl 8.16 0.48 17.03
Table 1: Overall return statistics for the cumulative P&L series of Figure 5.
Using delta-hedged LPing in other contexts. Our procedure is easily generalizable: any researcher
interested in analyzing the economic determinants of AMM LP returns can use our “hedged LPing”
methodology to eliminate LP positions’ market risk exposures. The procedure has very low data
requirements: to construct profits of the rebalancing strategy, (22), the researcher only needsxRB
t ,
the time series of risky asset holdings of the CFMM LP, and Pt, the CEX price of the risky asset.
Hedged LP P&L is then just the difference between raw pool PNL and the return on the rebalancing
strategy.
We believe our methodology is a substantial improvement over existing methods in the literature
to remove market risk exposures from LP P&L. Some papers, such as Fang [2022], use risk factor
models to account for the component of LP returns attributable to market risk. Our methodology
is much simpler: since a CFMM holds risky assets, it has first-order exposure to risky asset prices
at any point in time equal to whatever amount of the risky asset it holds. These risk exposures
can be accounted for simply by shorting the risky asset itself: this does not require taking a stance
on a risk factor model, and estimating factor loadings.
Other papers, such as Lehar et al. [2022] and Augustin et al. [2022], decompose LP P&L by
subtracting “impermanent loss” — loss versus a strategy which holds the initial asset position.
“Impermanent loss” — which we will refer to as “loss versus holding” or L VH— compares LP
performance to a benchmark which simply holds the initial bundle of risky assets. As we discuss
in Section 8, this combines losses from price slippage, which are always greater than 0, with the
returns from the rebalancing strategy, which can be thought of as a particular trading strategy that
bets on mean reversion. Impermanent loss is always equal in expectation toL VRunder risk-neutral
measure, but will always be noisier than L VR. Subtracting “impermanent loss” from LP returns
35

===== PAGE 36 =====

2021-08 2021-09 2021-10 2021-11 2021-12 2022-01 2022-022022-03 2022-04 2022-05 2022-06 2022-07 2022-08
-10M
-8M
-6M
-4M
-2M
0M
2M
cumulative P&L difference vs. fees_minus_lvr_pnl (USDC, millions)
diff_pnl_1D
diff_pnl_4H
diff_pnl_1H
diff_pnl_5min
diff_pnl_1min
Figure 6: Cumulative differences between the delta-hedgedP&L (various hedged_pnl series of Figure 5)
and predicted P&L from our model (fees_minus_lvr_pnl series of Figure 5).
thus results in, at best, a much noisier measure of returns, relative to L VR, reducing the likelihood
that the researcher can elucidate economic effects with high statistical power.
Finally, note that delta-hedging in practice requires periodic rebalancing; these rebalancing
trades, if executed on centralized exchanges, incur costs such as bid-ask spreads, trading fees, and
possibly margin and asset borrowing costs. Transaction-based fees can be limited somewhat by
rebalancing less frequently; this implies that the hedged LP position will accrue some market risk
in intervals between rebalancing trades. Our analysis in Figure 6 suggests that, for the WETH-
USDC pair, rebalancing every 4 hours produces similar results to higher frequencies, though this
finding would vary depending on the volatility of the underlying asset’s price.
7. Option Pricing
We have shown that CFMM LPs behave like a bet on volatility, in the sense thatL VRis large when
volatility is high. In this section, we briefly discuss the relationship of CFMM LPs to three classical
and inter-related ways that volatility can be traded [Carr and Madan, 2001]: static (European)
options positions, dynamic trading strategies, and variance swaps. In Appendix B.1, we also
demonstrate the equivalences between CFMM LP positions and these concepts in a simple two-
36

===== PAGE 37 =====

step binomial tree model.
7.1. Static Options Positions
Our results are related to Clark [2020], Fukasawa et al. [2022], and Deng et al. [2023], who show
that, over any finite time horizon, an AMM LP position’s payoff, ignoring fees, can be replicated by
shorting a bundle of European options. Technically, this follows from the facts that the CFMM’s
asset position and value are both path-independent: if the price is PT at time T, the CFMM
holds x∗(PT ) of the risky asset and has pool value VT =V (PT ) corresponding to the final “payoff
function” V (·), regardless of the path that prices took to reach PT. More intuitively, at any time
T, the CFMM simply offers a menu of quantities of the asset to buy or sell at any given price,
identically to a portfolio of European options. Ignoring fees, the CFMM exactly breaks even if prices
do not move, PT = P0, and loses money otherwise; hence, the CFMM LP position is essentially
equivalent to giving away a bundle of European options. This intuition is consistent with the fact
that the V (·) is a concave function (cf. Lemma 1).
Expected L VRuntil periodT can be thought of as the value of the European options given away.
This analogy gives another intuition for the comparative statics of expectedL VR. European options
are worth more when volatility is higher, so L VRis increasing in the volatility of the underlying
asset. When the marginal liquidity of the AMM bonding curve is greater, the replicating portfolio
of European options is larger: AMMs that trade more aggressively essentially give away more
European options, also increasing L VR.
As previous papers have discussed, the European option replication result also implies that,
over any finite time horizon, the exposure of the AMM LP position to underlying prices can be
totally hedged, by taking a long position in the replicating bundle of European options. This trade
— a long position in the AMM LP, plus a short position in the replicating bundle of European
options — is essentially a trading fee swap, betting on whether accrued trading fees from time 0
to T are greater than European option premia of the replicating portfolio at time 0. The trader
enters an LP position, and pays a premium for buying the replicating bundle of European options
upfront. The AMM LP position then loses no money from price movements; the total position
profits if the accrued trading fees until time T are greater than the European option premia paid
upfront, and loses otherwise.
37

===== PAGE 38 =====

7.2. Dynamic Trading Strategies
Classic options theory implies that static option positions are equivalent to dynamically trading
the underlying asset in a certain way. The static option position is a combination of short straddles
and strangles, selling out-of-money calls and puts. This position is equivalent to a dynamic trading
strategy which sells the asset when prices increase, and buys when prices decrease. This is exactly
what the AMM LP position does: observe that, from Lemma 1 Part 3, x∗(·) is non-increasing. If
prices decrease slightly fromP0 to Pt<P 0, the rebalancing strategy responds by buying the risky
asset. The rebalancing strategy thus makes a profit, relative to simply holding the initial position
x∗ (P0), if prices increase back to P0, and makes a loss if prices decrease further from Pt. This
argument holds symmetrically for price decreases, implying that the rebalancing strategy makes
losses if prices diverge from P0, and profits when prices make small movements away fromP0 and
back. In the special case where the risky asset’s price is a random walk, the rebalancing strategy
thus breaks even on on average. In contrast, when prices move away fromP0 and back, the CFMM
reverts to the initial valueV (P0), exactly breaking even: there is no profit from price convergence,
to offset the losses the CFMM makes when prices diverge fromP0.
7.3. Variance Swaps
Finally, as discussed by Fukasawa et al. [2022], variance can be traded directly by trading swaps on
realized variance. The VIX is such a contract, operating on a fixed finite time horizon. Applying
Lemma 1 Part 3, the instantaneous L VRof (8) can be re-written as
ℓ(σ,P ) = 1
2× (σP )2×|x∗′(P )|.
Here, the first component, (σP )2, is the instantaneous variance or quadratic variation of the price,
i.e., for small ∆t, Var[Pt+∆t|Pt = P ]≈ (σP )2 ∆t. Recalling that x∗(P ) is the total quantity of
risky asset held by the pool if the price is P, the second component, |x∗′(P )| corresponds to the
marginal liquidity available from the pool at price level P. Now, integrating over time, we have
that
L VRt = 1
2
∫t
0
(σsPs)2×|x∗′(Ps)|ds = 1
2
∫t
0
|x∗′(Ps)|d[P ]s, ∀ t≥ 0.
38

===== PAGE 39 =====

This expression is the payoff of the floating leg of a continuously sampled generalized variance swap
[Carr and Lee, 2009, see, e.g.,], specifically a price variance swap that is weighted by marginal
liquidity.
8. Other Benchmarks and “Impermanent Loss”
In this section, we consider the possibility of alternative benchmarks aside from the rebalancing
strategy. We first define a broad class of benchmark strategies: the only restrictions we impose on
these strategies are that they begin holding the same position in the risky asset as the CFMM, and
that they adjust holdings at CEX prices. Specifically, we define a benchmark as a self-financing
trading strategy, described by a position ¯xt in the risky asset. We assume that initial holdings
match the pool, i.e.,(¯x0, ¯y0) ≜
(
x∗(P0),y∗(P0)
)
. We assume that ¯xt satisfies the square-integrability
condition (3), so that the resulting trading strategy is admissible. Denote the value of that strategy
by ¯Rt, so that
¯Rt =V0 +
∫t
0
¯xsdPs, ∀ t≥ 0.
For any such benchmark, we can thus define theloss-versus-benchmark according to L VBt ≜ ¯Rt−Vt.
The following result characterizes the loss process L VBt as a function of the underlying benchmark
strategy ¯xt.
Corollary 1. For all t≥ 0,
L VBt = L VRt +
∫t
0
[¯xs−x∗(Ps)] dPs
  
≜∆(¯x)t
,
(24)
and at the same time,
EQ [L VBt] = EQ [L VRt] . (25)
The loss process has quadratic variation
[L VB]t = [∆(¯x)]t =
∫t
0
[¯xs−x∗(Ps)]2 σ2
sP 2
s ds≥ [L VR]t = 0. (26)
Therefore, among all benchmark strategies, the rebalancing strategy uniquely defines a loss process
39

===== PAGE 40 =====

with minimal (zero) quadratic variation.
Proof. The first part is an immediate corollary of Theorem 1 and (5). The second part is immediate
by the definition of the risk-neutral measure. The third part follows from the Itô isometry. ■
There are two ways to interpret Corollary 1. On the one hand, in (24), the expected value of
∆(¯x)t is always 0 under the risk-neutral measure. Thus, the second part of Corollary 1 expresses
that the risk-neutral expectation of L VBis the same for any choice of benchmark, including L VR
and the HODL benchmark. This is because CFMM LP losses arise from trading at off-market
prices: any benchmark which trades at market prices, in expectation, does equally well under
the risk-neutral measure, and thus the gap between any market benchmark and L VRis equal in
expectation. In this sense, the market price of the expected losses of CFMM LPs is invariant to
the particular choice of market-based benchmark.
On the other hand, L VRis the unique choice of benchmark which eliminates differences in
performance between the CFMM and the benchmark strategy due to market risk, and isolating
losses due to price slippage. All benchmarks outperform the CFMM LP position by the same
amount in expectation; however, on any given price path Pt, any given benchmark may over- or
underperform to the CFMM LP position, because the benchmark may adopt different holding
strategies for the risky asset from the CFMM. As an example, we showed in Section 6 that the
CFMM LP position underperforms a benchmark which sells all ETH and holds¯xt = 0 throughout,
because of the fact that the CFMM LP holds a larger ETH position and ETH prices dropped
over the time horizon we analyze, implying the misleading conclusion that the CFMM LP position
underperformed a market-based benchmark.
The L VRbenchmark is useful because the rebalancing strategy exactly matches the risky asset
holdings of the CFMM, removing differences in market risk exposure and isolates losses due to
slippage. Theorem 1 showed thatL VRis a strictly increasing process: it isalways positive, regardless
of the path prices take. Expression (26) thus shows that the rebalancing strategy is the unique choice
of benchmark which minimizes the quadratic variation of the loss process: that is, any other choice
of benchmark can be thought of as L VR, plus a noise term which has mean 0 under risk-neutral
measure, caused by differences in market risk exposures. Thus, in our view, benchmarks other
than the rebalancing strategy confound two concepts: L VR, which captures losses of the CFMM
40

===== PAGE 41 =====

LP position due to trading at off-market prices, and ∆(¯x), which captures differences between the
risky asset holdings of the CFMM and the benchmark.23
One benchmark of particular interest is a strategy that simply holds the initial position, i.e.,
xHODL
t ≜x∗(P0), with value
RHODL
t =V0 +
∫t
0
x∗(P0)dPs =V0 +x∗(P0) (Pt−P0), ∀ t≥ 0.
Loss versus theHODL benchmark, introduced by Pintail [2019], is sometimes known by practitioners
as “impermanent loss” or “divergence loss” [e.g., Engel and Herlihy, 2021]. Motivated by the
aforementioned analysis, in our view this is more accurately described as “loss-versus-holding”:
L VHt ≜RHODL
t −Vt. Like L VR, L VHis L VHis always non-negative:
Proposition 1. For all t≥ 0,
L VHt≥ 0, (27)
i.e., L VHis a non-negative process.
Proof. We have that
L VHt =RHODL
t −Vt = (Ptx∗(P0) +y∗(P0))− (Ptx∗(Pt) +y∗(Pt)),
and, by the optimality of Equation (1) forP =Pt, this quantity is always non-negative. ■
While L VHis non-negative, it cannot be viewed as a true “running cost”: L VH, like any L VB
for any non-rebalancing benchmark, contains a market risk component, and it can always revert.
Indeed, from (24), the only permanent and non-reverting component of L VHis L VR. Beyond that,
there are other disadvantages to L VHas a cost metric. First, L VHdepends on the initial position
at time t = 0. This means that two different LPs investing in a pool will realize different L VH
over the same interval of time, depending on the pool holdings at their respective initial times of
investment. To contrast, L VRover the same interval of time is the same (up to proportionality of
the investment size) for all LPs. Another disadvantage of L VHis that it is path independent: the
23Examining (24), it is clear that L VBis a super-martingale and that, as per the Doob-Meyer decomposition, it
must decompose uniquely into an increasing predictable process (the “compensator”) and a martingale. L VRis the
compensator for L VBindependent of the choice of benchmark, while ∆(¯x) defines the martingale component and
depends on the choice of benchmark.
41

===== PAGE 42 =====

value of L VHdepends only on the asset price at the beginning and end of the observation interval.
On the other hand, L VRis path dependent and depends on the entire sample path. This makes
more sense for an adverse selection cost: intuitively, the profitability of market making should
depend on quantities such as realized volatility or quadratic variation which measure the rate new
information is incorporated into prices over the time interval, as L VRdoes.
A common argument in the industry discourse for the benchmark of “impermanent loss” states
that, as long as prices revert to their initial values, AMM holdings will also revert to their initial
state, resulting in zero losses. We analyze this argument in Appendix B.1. In a slight departure
from our baseline model, we assume prices evolve according to a two-step binomial tree. In the
first step of the tree, the risky asset’s price either increases or decreases; in the second step, prices
can either revert to their initial level, or diverge further. The basic trading strategy of an CFMM
is to sell the risky asset when its price increases, and buy when its price decreases. Trading in this
manner is a bet on mean reversion: when implemented trading at CEX prices, as the rebalancing
strategy does, the strategy profits if prices mean-revert, and loses if prices diverge further, thus
breaking even on average. The CFMM executes the same trades as the rebalancing strategy, but
attains worse prices on each trade. Thus, the CFMM exactly breaks even if prices mean-revert, and
loses more money than the rebalancing strategy if prices diverge, thus losing money on average.
This example illustrates that, for an CFMM to perform well, it is not sufficient to break even
when prices revert; a trading strategy which sells into price rises and buys into price decreases
must actually make strictly positive profits when prices revert, in order to compensate for the
losses it makes when prices diverge. An AMM’s performance should thus be benchmarked to the
rebalancing strategy — making the same trades at CEX prices — rather than the intuitive but
misleading benchmark that the CFMM should break even upon price reversion.
9. Discussion and Implications
Besides their positive value for understanding and quantifying the losses from AMM LPing, our
results also suggest ways that these losses could be reduced or eliminated. We showed that CFMM
LPs lose money from price slippage: when CEX prices move, CFMM quotes become “stale” and
are vulnerable to sniping by rebalancing arbitrageurs. This slippage can in principle be eliminated:
42

===== PAGE 43 =====

if an AMM had access to a high-frequency oracle for the CEX pricePt, the AMM could in principle
quote prices arbitrarily close to Pt, up to the desired asset position x∗ (Pt).24 Quoting prices this
way would reduce arbitrageurs’ profits, allowing the AMM to achieve a payoff arbitrarily close to
that of the rebalancing strategy. This design has a number of risks — it relies heavily on the
accuracy of the oracle for Pt, and leaves open the potential for oracle manipulation — but in
principle an oracle-based AMM could substantially reduce or eliminate L VR.
A related set of AMM designs revolve around selling the right to arbitrage the pool to certain
special wallets, and redistributing profits to AMM LPs. This could be done in several ways. Suppose
a particular crypto wallet address, which we call the “authorized participant” or AP, had the unique
right for the first AMM trade in every block. This first execution right effectively conveys the right
to arbitrage the pool [Josojo, 2022]. Alternatively, the AP could be provided the right to trade
with the AMM paying zero fees [Jump Crypto, 2022]. The AP would then have a large advantage
in arbitrage trading, since the AP could profitably trade against arbitrarily small price movements,
whereas prices would have to move at least as much as the AMM’s percentage trading fees for non-
AP wallets to profit from arbitrage trade. The AP would thus be able to capture a large fraction
of fees from arbitrage trade. In either of these designs, an AMM protocol aiming to reduce L VR
could thus run an AP wallet itself, doing CEX-DEX arbitrage, and redistributing arbitrage profits
to LPs. Alternatively, AMM protocols could simply run periodic auctions — over longer periods,
such as weeks or months — in which wallets can bid for the right to be authorized participants
for some period of time. In principle, potential arbitrageurs should bid the ex ante expectation
of arbitrage profits, which includes L VR; the protocol can then redistribute these profits to LPs.
Adams et al. [2024] analyzes this design in detail.25 Both these methods capture either L VRor its
expectation, and redistribute the profits to pool LPs. Another strand of work has argued that L VR
would be reduced or eliminated if orders were sold inbatch auctions, rather than placed directly in
mempools; this design is discussed in Ramseyer et al. [2022] and Canidio and Fritsch [2023], and
related “request-for-quotes” mechanisms are now in use in a number of widely used protocols. 26
24A similar design is proposed in Krishnamachari et al. [2021b].
25Note that one subtlety about the zero fee design is that, in addition to rebalancing arbitrage profits, APs would
be able to capture reversion arbitrage profits; hence,L VRprovides a lower bound for how much revenue wallets could
capture from having preferential access to arbitrage the pool.
26“Batching” is used in CoWswap; a number of AMM protocols have also implemented related RFQ-like systems,
such as Uniswap X, 1inch fusion, and Paraswap AugustusRFQ.
43

===== PAGE 44 =====

We believe that these are interesting directions for future AMM design research.
An earlier line of work seeks to design specific CFMMs with good properties by identifying
good bonding functions [Port and Tiruviluamala, 2022, Wu and McTighe, 2022, Forgy and Lau,
2021, Krishnamachari et al., 2021a]. Our work suggests that bonding functions only affect L VR
insofar as they change the marginal liquidity of CFMMs. In certain cases, it may be desirable for
marginal liquidity should vary with prices in a systematic way – this may be the case, for example,
for stablecoin swap pairs. In other cases, different bonding functions, or “universal” AMM designs
such as Uniswap v3, have equivalent infinitesimal L VRwhenever they have equivalent amounts of
marginal liquidity for an asset pair.
10. Conclusion
In this paper, we constructed a model of AMM LP profits. We defined the losses suffered by LPs as
“loss-versus-rebalancing”, or L VR; this is the gap between the profits of an AMM LP position, and
the returns from a trading strategy which perfectly mimics the AMM’s position in the risky asset,
but performs all trades at market prices. L VRarises from the fact that AMMs always trade at
off-market prices, leaving money to arbitrageurs trading the AMM against a CEX. L VRis greater
when prices are more volatile, and when the AMM’s “marginal liquidity” is greater, that is, it
trades more aggressively in response to price movements. A delta-hedged AMM LP position — a
position which is long the LP position, and short the rebalancing strategy — is profitable if the
AMM collects more in fees than it loses in L VR. The model is quantitatively realistic enough to be
brought to data; we show that our expressions for L VRpredict AMM LP losses fairly accurately
in practice. Our results have implications for how to measure AMM LP losses, and also how to
redesign AMMs to reduce or eliminate L VR, which could lower the effective trading fees paid by
market participants relying on AMMs for token pair liquidity.
References
Austin Adams, Ciamac Moallemi, Sara Reynolds, and Dan Robinson. am-amm: An auction-managed auto-
mated market maker. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03367, 2024.
Hayden Adams, Noah Zinsmeister, and Dan Robinson. Uniswap v2 core, 2020.
Hayden Adams, Noah Zinsmeister, Moody Salem, River Keefer, and Dan Robinson. Uniswap v3 core, 2021.
44

===== PAGE 45 =====

Algebra Protocol. ALGEBRA Ecosystem: Decentralized exchange, 2023. URL https://algebra.finance/
static/Algerbra%20Tech%20Paper-15411d15f8653a81d5f7f574bfe655ad.pdf.
Guillermo Angeris and Tarun Chitra. Improved price oracles: Constant function market makers. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2nd ACM Conference on Advances in Financial Technologies, pages 80–91, 2020.
Guillermo Angeris, Hsien-Tang Kao, Rei Chiang, Charlie Noyes, and Tarun Chitra. An analysis of uniswap
markets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.03380, 2019.
Guillermo Angeris, Alex Evans, and Tarun Chitra. When does the tail wag the dog? curvature and market
making. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.08040, 2020.
Guillermo Angeris, Alex Evans, and Tarun Chitra. Replicating market makers. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2103.14769, 2021a.
Guillermo Angeris, Alex Evans, and Tarun Chitra. Replicating monotonic payoffs without oracles. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2111.13740, 2021b.
Aori Protocol. Trading on Aori, 2023. URL https://www.aori.io/docs/trading.
Jun Aoyagi. Liquidity provision by automated market makers. SSRN 3674178, 2020.
Jun Aoyagi and Yuki Ito. Coexisting exchange platforms: Limit order books and automated market makers.
SSRN 3808755, 2021.
Matteo Aquilina, Eric Budish, and Peter O’neill. Quantifying the high-frequency trading “arms race”. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 137(1):493–564, 2022.
Patrick Augustin, Roy Chen-Zhang, and Donghwa Shin. Reaching for yield in decentralized financial markets.
Working paper, 2022.
Markus Baldauf and Joshua Mollner. High-frequency trading and market performance. The Journal of
Finance, 75(3):1495–1526, 2020.
Andrea Barbon and Angelo Ranaldo. On the quality of cryptocurrency markets: Centralized versus decen-
tralized exchanges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.07386, 2021.
Dimitri P Bertsekas. Control of uncertain systems with a set-membership description of the uncertainty.
PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1971.
Bruno Biais, Thierry Foucault, and Sophie Moinas. Equilibrium fast trading.Journal of Financial economics,
116(2):292–313, 2015.
Fischer Black and Myron Scholes. The pricing of options and corporate liabilities. Journal of political
economy, 81(3):637–654, 1973.
Nassib Boueri. G3m impermanent loss dynamics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.06593, 2021.
Michael Brolley and Marius Zoican. On-demand fast trading on decentralized exchanges. Finance Research
Letters, 51:103350, 2023.
Eric Budish, Peter Cramton, and John Shim. The high-frequency trading arms race: Frequent batch auctions
as a market design response. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(4):1547–1621, 2015.
Vitalik Buterin. Let’s run on-chain decentralized exchanges the way we run prediction markets, October 2016.
URL www.reddit.com/r/ethereum/comments/55m04x/lets_run_onchain_decentralized_exchanges_
the_way/.
Andrea Canidio and Robin Fritsch. Arbitrageurs’ profits, lvr, and sandwich attacks: batch trading as an
amm design response. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.02074, 2023.
45

===== PAGE 46 =====

Agostino Capponi and Ruizhe Jia. The adoption of blockchain-based decentralized exchanges.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2103.08842, 2021.
Peter Carr and Roger Lee. Volatility derivatives. Annu. Rev. Financ. Econ., 1(1):319–339, 2009.
Peter Carr and Dilip Madan. Towards a theory of volatility trading. Option pricing, interest rates and risk
management, handbooks in mathematical finance, 22(7):458–476, 2001.
Peter P Carr and Robert A Jarrow. The stop-loss start-gain paradox and option valuation: A new decom-
position into intrinsic and time value. The review of financial studies, 3(3):469–492, 1990.
Álvaro Cartea, Fayçal Drissi, and Marcello Monga. Decentralised finance and automated market making:
Predictable loss and optimal liquidity provision. Available at SSRN 4273989, 2022.
Álvaro Cartea, Fayçal Drissi, and Marcello Monga. Predictable losses of liquidity provision in constant
function markets and concentrated liquidity markets. Applied Mathematical Finance, 30(2):69–93, 2023.
Cata Labs. Optimising lp performance part 2: Dynamic fees, Nov 2023. URL https://blog.catalyst.
exchange/optimising-lp-performance-part-2-dynamic-fees/ .
Y. Chen and D.M Pennock. A utility framework for bounded-loss market makers. InProceedings of the 23rd
Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI 2007 , pages 49–56, Vancouver, BC, Canada,
2007.
Joseph Clark. The replicating portfolio of a constant product market. Available at SSRN 3550601, 2020.
CrocSwap. Usage of markout to calculate lp profitability in uniswap v3, 2022. URL https://crocswap.
medium.com/usage-of-markout-to-calculate-lp-profitability-in-uniswap-v3-e32773b1a88e .
Philip Daian, Steven Goldfeder, Tyler Kell, Yunqi Li, Xueyuan Zhao, Iddo Bentov, Lorenz Breidenbach, and
Ari Juels. Flash boys 2.0: Frontrunning in decentralized exchanges, miner extractable value, and consensus
instability. In 2020 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pages 910–927. IEEE, 2020.
Jun Deng, Hua Zong, and Yun Wang. Static replication of impermanent loss for concentrated liquidity
provision in decentralised markets. Operations Research Letters, 51(3):206–211, 2023.
Avinash K Dixit and Robert S Pindyck. Investment under uncertainty. Princeton university press, 1994.
Atis Elsts. Conceptualizing Uniswap v3 LP profit and loss, January 2023. URL https://atise.medium.
com/conceptualizing-uniswap-v3-lp-profit-and-loss-ecbae6e09644 .
Daniel Engel and Maurice Herlihy. Presentation and publication: Loss and slippage in networks of automated
market makers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.09872, 2021.
Alex Evans. Liquidity provider returns in geometric mean markets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.08806, 2020.
Chuck Fang. Liquidity misallocation on decentralized exchanges. Available at SSRN 4281293, 2022.
Fenbushi Capital. Ending LP’s Losing Game: Exploring the Loss-Versus-Rebalancing (LVR) Problem and
its Solutions, Oct 2023. URL https://mirror.xyz/0xbdA5bCe76bF62d97D9C9dF0425CC10079Df1aD75/
bWOCccjVC7eoYKOzgmjXFdhWDc8rrUL6Yei-eugF52s.
Sean Foley, Peter O’Neill, and T¯alis J Putni¸ nš. A better market design? applying ‘automated market makers’
to traditional financial markets. Available at SSRN 4459924, 2023.
Eric Forgy and Leo Lau. A family of multi-asset automated market makers.arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.08115,
2021.
Masaaki Fukasawa, Basile Maire, and Marcus Wunsch. Weighted variance swaps hedge against impermanent
loss. Available at SSRN 4095029, 2022.
46

===== PAGE 47 =====

Lawrence R Glosten and Paul R Milgrom. Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist market with
heterogeneously informed traders. Journal of financial economics, 14(1):71–100, 1985.
Jianlei Han, Shiyang Huang, and Zhuo Zhong. Trust in defi: an empirical study of the decentralized exchange.
Available at SSRN 3896461, 2021.
Joel Hasbrouck, Thomas J Rivera, and Fahad Saleh. The need for fees at a dex: How increases in fees can
increase dex trading volume. Available at SSRN, 2022.
Joel Hasbrouck, Thomas J Rivera, and Fahad Saleh. An economic model of a decentralized exchange with
concentrated liquidity. Available at SSRN 4529513, 2023.
Josojo. MEV capturing AMM (McAMM), 2022. URL https://ethresear.ch/t/
mev-capturing-amm-mcamm/13336.
Jump Crypto. Pyth Defender white paper draft. Working paper, September 2022.
Ariah Klages-Mundt and Steffen Schuldenzucker. Elliptic Concentrated Liquidity Pool (E-CLP): Technical
Overview, 2022.
Bhaskar Krishnamachari, Qi Feng, and Eugenio Grippo. Dynamic automated market makers for decentral-
ized cryptocurrency exchange. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain and Cryptocurrency
(ICBC), pages 1–2, 2021a. doi: 10.1109/ICBC51069.2021.9461100.
Bhaskar Krishnamachari, Qi Feng, and Eugenio Grippo. Dynamic curves for decentralized autonomous
cryptocurrency exchanges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.02778, 2021b.
Guillaume Lambert. Website at https://lambert-guillaume.medium.com/, 2022.
Alfred Lehar and Christine A Parlour. Decentralized exchanges. Technical report, Working paper, 2021.
Alfred Lehar, Christine A Parlour, and Marius Zoican. Liquidity fragmentation on decentralized exchanges.
Available at SSRN 4267429, 2022.
Gordon Liao and Dan Robinson. The dominance of uniswap v3 liquidity. https://blog.uniswap.org/
uniswap-v3-dominance, 2022. Accessed: 2024-05-01.
Alan Lu and Martin Köppelmann. Building a Decentralized Exchange in Ethereum, March 2017. URL
https://blog.gnosis.pm/building-a-decentralized-exchange-in-ethereum-eea4e7452d6e .
Jason Milionis, Ciamac C. Moallemi, and Tim Roughgarden. Extended Abstract: The Effect of Trading
Fees on Arbitrage Profits in Automated Market Makers. In Financial Cryptography and Data Security.
FC 2023 International Workshops. Springer International Publishing, 2023a. ISBN 978-3-031-48805-4.
Jason Milionis, Ciamac C. Moallemi, and Tim Roughgarden. Complexity-Approximation Trade-offs in Ex-
change Mechanisms: AMMs vs. LOBs. In Financial Cryptography and Data Security. Springer Interna-
tional Publishing, 2023b. ISBN 978-3-031-47753-9.
Jason Milionis, Ciamac C. Moallemi, and Tim Roughgarden. A Myersonian Framework for Optimal Liquidity
Provision in Automated Market Makers. In15th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference
(ITCS 2024), Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), Dagstuhl, Germany, 2024. Schloss
Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik.
Peter O’Neill. Can Markets be Fully Automated? Evidence From an “Automated Market Maker”, January
2022. URL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/petero1111/website/gh-pages/ONeill_JMP_2022.
pdf.
Andreas Park. The conceptual flaws of constant product automated market making. Available at SSRN
3805750, 2021.
47

===== PAGE 48 =====

David M Pennock and Rahul Sami. Computational aspects of prediction markets.Algorithmic game theory,
pages 651–674, 2007.
Pintail. Uniswap: A good deal for liquidity providers?, 2019. URL https://pintail.medium.com/
uniswap-a-good-deal-for-liquidity-providers-104c0b6816f2 .
Alexander Port and Neelesh Tiruviluamala. Mixing constant sum and constant product market makers.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.12123, 2022.
Kaihua Qin, Liyi Zhou, and Arthur Gervais. Quantifying blockchain extractable value: How dark is the
forest? In 2022 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pages 198–214. IEEE, 2022.
Geoffrey Ramseyer, Mohak Goyal, Ashish Goel, and David Mazières. Augmenting batch exchanges with
constant function market makers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.04929, 2022.
Carl P Simon, Lawrence Blume, et al. Mathematics for economists, volume 7. Norton New York, 1994.
Martin Tassy and David White. Growth rate of a liquidity provider’s wealth in xy = c automated market
makers, 2020.
Mike Wu and Will McTighe. Constant power root market makers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.07452, 2022.
Liyi Zhou, Kaihua Qin, Christof Ferreira Torres, Duc V Le, and Arthur Gervais. High-frequency trading on
decentralized on-chain exchanges. In2021 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pages 428–445.
IEEE, 2021.
48

===== PAGE 49 =====

Appendix
A. Proofs
A.1. Proof of Theorem 1
First, we show that L VRt is equal to expression (7). The smoothness condition of Assumption 1
Part 2 allows us to apply Itô’s lemma toV (·) to obtain
dVt =V′(Pt)dPt + 1
2V′′(Pt) (dPt)2
=V′(Pt)dPt + 1
2V′′(Pt)σ2P 2
t dt
=x∗(Pt)dPt + 1
2V′′(Pt)σ2P 2
t dt,
(28)
where the last step follows from Lemma 1 Part 2. Comparing with (5), we obtain (7). Finally, the
fact that ℓ(σ,P )≥ 0 follows from Lemma 1 Part 3.
Next, we show that the cumulative profits of rebalancing arbitrageurs over the time interval
[0,T ] is equal to L VRT. We start with a discrete approximation to the arbitrage profit, indexed
by N ≥ 1. Suppose arbitrageurs arrive sequentially, so that the ith arbitrageur arrives at time
τi, for 1≤ i≤ N. For convenience, set τ0 ≜ 0 and τN+1 ≜ T. For each 1≤ i≤ N, at time
τi, the ith arbitrageur observes the price Pτi, rebalances the pool from
(
x∗(Pτi−1),y∗(Pτi−1)
)
to
(
x∗(Pτi),y∗(Pτi)
)
. In other words, the arbitrageur purchases x∗(Pτi−1)−x∗(Pτi) units of the risky
asset from the CFMM at average price :
P CFMM
i ≜−y∗(Pτi)−y∗(Pτi−1)
x∗(Pτi)−x∗(Pτi−1).
The arbitrageur can then sell these units on the external market at price Pτi and earn profits (in
the numéraire) from the difference in price according to
(
Pτi−P CFMM
i
)[
x∗(Pτi−1)−x∗(Pτi)
]
=Pτi
[
x∗(Pτi−1)−x∗(Pτi)
]
+
[
y∗(Pτi−1)−y∗(Pτi)
]
.
Denote by ARB(N)
T the aggregate arbitrage profits. Summing over 1≤i≤N, telescoping the sum,
49

===== PAGE 50 =====

and applying summation-by-parts yields
ARB(N)
T ≜
N∑
i=1
{
Pτi
[
x∗(Pτi−1)−x∗(Pτi)
]
+
[
y∗(Pτi−1)−y∗(Pτi)
]}
=
N∑
i=1
Pτi
[
x∗(Pτi−1)−x∗(Pτi)
]
+y∗(P0)−y∗(PτN )
=P0x∗(P0) +y∗(P0) +
N∑
i=0
x∗(Pτi)
[
Pτi+1−Pτi
]
−PTx∗(PτN )−y∗(PτN ).
Observe that the sum in the final expression is the discrete approximation of an Itô integral.
Assume that the time partition mesh over [0,T ] shrinks to zero as N →∞ . Taking the limit
as N→∞ and passing to continuous time, the sum converges to an Itô integral, which is well-
defined under Assumption 1 Part 3. Further, τN→T, so that PτN→PT, and x∗(PτN )→x∗(PT ),
y∗(PτN )→y∗(PT ). Thus, it holds that
ARBT ≜ lim
N→∞
ARB(N)
T =V (P0) +
∫T
0
x∗(Pt)dPt−V (PT ).
Hence, the cumulative profits of rebalancing arbitrageurs from time 0 to time T are equal to L VR,
defined in (6).
A.2. L VR, Marginal Liquidity, and Bonding Function Curvature
For sufficiently smooth CFMM bonding functions, the marginal liquidity can be expressed in terms
of derivatives of the CFMM bonding function:
dx
dP =
∂f
∂y(
∂2f
∂x2 +P 2∂2f
∂y2− 2P ∂2f
∂x∂y
) (29)
Qualitatively, (29) implies that marginal liquidity, x′ (P ), is related to the curvature of the
CFMM invariant curves. The denominator of (29) is equal toP 2 times the negative of the determi-
nant of the bordered Hessian off. f is strictly quasiconcave — that is, the upper level sets off are
convex — if and only if this determinant is positive; moreover, the magnitude of the determinant
is related to the curvature of the level curves of f [Simon et al., 1994, p. 542]. Thus, CFMM
invariants with “flatter”, more linear level curves will have greater marginal liquidity dx
dP , and also
50

===== PAGE 51 =====

greater L VR.
(29) is also useful because it can be used to calculate dx
dP using analytic expressions for bonding
functions, which may be useful for computing L VRin practice.
A.2.1. Derivation of (29)
The Lagrangian of the pool expenditure minimization problem, (1), is:
Λ =Px +y +λ [f (x,y )−L]
The optimal solution is characterized by the FOCs:
∂Λ
∂x : P +λ∂f
∂x = 0 (30)
∂Λ
∂y : 1 + λ∂f
∂y = 0 (31)
∂Λ
∂λ : f (x,y )−L = 0 (32)
Now, we will take dx
dP by applying the implicit function theorem to this system of first-order con-
ditions. The derivatives of the FOCs are:
∂
∂P
∂Λ
∂x : 1
∂
∂P
∂Λ
∂y : 0
∂
∂P
∂Λ
∂λ : 0
∂
∂x
∂Λ
∂x : λ∂2f
∂x2
∂
∂x
∂Λ
∂y : λ ∂2f
∂x∂y
∂
∂x
∂Λ
∂λ : ∂f
∂x
51

===== PAGE 52 =====

∂
∂y
∂Λ
∂x : λ ∂2f
∂x∂y
∂
∂y
∂Λ
∂y : λ∂2f
∂y2
∂
∂y
∂Λ
∂λ : ∂f
∂y
∂
∂λ
∂Λ
∂x : −∂f
∂x
∂
∂λ
∂Λ
∂y : −∂f
∂y
∂
∂λ
∂Λ
∂λ : 0
Hence, we wish to solve the following system of equations for dx
dP :
∂
∂P
∂Λ
∂x + ∂
∂x
∂Λ
∂x
dx
dP + ∂
∂y
∂Λ
∂x
dy
dP + ∂
∂λ
∂Λ
∂x
dλ
dP = 0
∂
∂P
∂Λ
∂y + ∂
∂x
∂Λ
∂y
dx
dP + ∂
∂y
∂Λ
∂y
dy
dP + ∂
∂λ
∂Λ
∂y
dλ
dP = 0
∂
∂P
∂Λ
∂λ + ∂
∂x
∂Λ
∂λ
dx
dP + ∂
∂y
∂Λ
∂λ
dy
dP + ∂
∂λ
∂Λ
∂λ
dλ
dP = 0
Substituting, we have:
1 +λ∂2f
∂x2
dx
dP +λ ∂2f
∂x∂y
dy
dP− ∂f
∂x
dλ
dP = 0 (33)
0 +λ ∂2f
∂x∂y
dx
dP +λ∂2f
∂y2
dy
dP− ∂f
∂y
dλ
dP = 0 (34)
∂f
∂x
dx
dP + ∂f
∂y
dy
dP = 0 (35)
Now, applying (30) and (31), we have:
∂f
∂x =P∂f
∂y (36)
Thus, we can simplify (35) to:
dy
dP =−P dx
dP
52

===== PAGE 53 =====

Substituting into (33) and (34), we have:
1 +λ∂2f
∂x2
dx
dP +λ ∂2f
∂x∂y
(
−P dx
dP
)
− ∂f
∂x
dλ
dP = 0
0 +λ ∂2f
∂x∂y
dx
dP +λ∂2f
∂y2
(
−P dx
dP
)
− ∂f
∂y
dλ
dP = 0
Rearranging, (
∂2f
∂x2−P ∂2f
∂x∂y
)
λdx
dP = ∂f
∂x
dλ
dP− 1 (37)
(
∂2f
∂x∂y−P∂2f
∂y2
)
λdx
dP = ∂f
∂y
dλ
dP (38)
Now, multiply (38) byP, applying (36), and subtract (37), to get:
(
∂2f
∂x2 +P 2∂2f
∂y2− 2P ∂2f
∂x∂y
)
λdx
dp =−1
Now,
dx
dP = −1
λ
(
∂2f
∂x2 +P 2∂2f
∂y2− 2P ∂2f
∂x∂y
)
Now, to solve forλ, we simply use (31). Hence, we have:
dx
dP =
∂f
∂y(
∂2f
∂x2 +P 2∂2f
∂y2− 2P ∂2f
∂x∂y
) (39)
This is (29).
B. Other Results
B.1. L VR and Impermanent Loss in a Two-Step Binomial Tree
In this appendix, we consider the performance of the CFMM and the rebalancing strategy, as well
as the simple buy-and-hold benchmark, on a two-step binomial tree. This discrete-time model is a
departure from our baseline model, but usefully illustrates the intuitions behind how the rebalancing
strategy behaves relative to the buy-and-hold strategy, why the CFMM strategy under-performs
the rebalancing strategy, and why the benchmark behind the “impermanent loss” concept — that
53

===== PAGE 54 =====

the CFMM should not lose money if prices revert to their original state — is inappropriate.
The binomial tree is a two-period discrete-time model, where prices can either go up or down
in each time period. The tree is depicted in Panel A of Figure 7. The price begins at P0 = 1. In
the first step of the tree, the price can then increase to PU
1 = 1.4, or decrease to PD
1 = 0.6. In
the second step, from PU
1 , the price can increase to PUU
2 = 1.8, or decrease to the original level
PUD
1 = 1. From PD
1 , the price can increase to the original level PDU
2 = 1, or decrease further
to PDD
2 = 0.4. Note that the tree is set up so that, assuming 0 interest rates, the risk-neutral
probabilities of up and down movements are all 0.5 — in other words, prices are martingales if the
probabilities of up and down movements are equal, so no strategy trading at market prices should
be able to make or lose money in expectation.
We then calculate the asset positions and profits of three strategies in each tree state: the buy-
and-hold strategy, which simply holds the initial endowment(x0,y 0) = 1, 1 forever; the CFMM; and
the rebalancing strategy. To calculate these quantities, for the CFMM, we simply compute what
(xt,yt) is as a function of the tree price and the initial state (x0,y 0). For the rebalancing strategy,
in each tree state, if the CFMM trades from (xt,yt) to (xt+1,yt+1), we assume the rebalancing
strategy trades to xt+1 at the price Pt+1; hence, the rebalancing strategy’s cash position is:
yt+1 =yt−Pt (xt+1−xt)
The results are shown in Figure 7. Panel B considers the profits of the buy-and-hold strategy, which
simply holds the initial endowment (x0,y 0) = 1, 1 forever. This strategy is exposed to market risk,
making mark-to-market profits if prices rise and losing if prices fall.
Panel C shows the performance of the rebalancing strategy. Since this strategy trades at market
prices, it does not make or lose money in expectation under the risk-neutral measure. In period 1,
the rebalancing strategy has exactly the same profits as the buy-and-hold strategy in each state.
However, the rebalancing strategy sells the risky asset when prices increase to PU
1 = 1.4. This is
essentially a bet that prices will decrease; indeed, if prices decrease to PUD
2 = 1, the rebalancing
strategy makes Πt = 2.062, which is slightly higher than the buy-and-hold’s final inventory value
of Πt = 2.000. Conversely, if prices increase further to PUU
2 = 1.8, the rebalancing strategy makes
2.738, slightly lower than the buy-and-hold strategy’s value 2.800. On average, the rebalancing
54

===== PAGE 55 =====

strategy makes 2.400 conditional on reaching PU
1 , like the buy-and-hold strategy, or any other
strategy trading at market prices.
Analogously, if prices first decrease toPD
1 = 0.6, the rebalancing strategy buys the risky asset;
it profits relative to buy-and-hold when prices increase to PDU
2 = 1, and loses if prices decrease
further toPDD
2 = 0.2. This example shows that the rebalancing strategy is essentially a bet on price
convergence. The rebalancing strategy sells into price increases and buys into price decreases; this
pays off if prices mean-revert, and loses money if prices diverge further. However, the rebalancing
strategy does not make or lose money on average.
The performance of the CFMM is shown in Panel D. The CFMM makes the same trades as
the rebalancing strategy; thus, xt is the same in each tree state in panels C and D. However,
the CFMM always trades at worse-than-market prices; as a result, yt is higher state-by-state on
the rebalancing strategy compared to the CFMM. A natural definition of loss-versus-rebalancing
in discrete time would be the gap between the CFMM’syt-position, and the rebalancing strategy’s
yt-position, in each state.
Note that the CFMM strategy has the elegant feature that, if prices revert to 1 — as in states
PUD
2 andPDU
2 — the CFMM always holds exactly the same position as the buy-and-hold strategy.
This is the basis of the colloquially popular idea that CFMM losses are “impermanent”. However,
the CFMM loses money in expectation: the average profit of the CFMM, across states, is lower than
the buy-and-hold strategy in both periods 1 and 2. Essentially, the CFMM bets on convergence,
like the rebalancing strategy, but does so in a very inefficient way. The CFMM exactly breaks even
if prices revert to their initial state, and loses money — even relative to the rebalancing strategy
— if prices diverge. The CFMM strategy thus cannot break even without fees, because there is no
state of the world where the CFMM strategy makes positive amounts. Using the options analogy,
an CFMM LP position is a dynamic trading strategy which performs like giving away a straddle
without collecting premia: the position loses money whenever prices move, and exactly breaks even
when prices end where they started.
This example also shows that the gap between the simple CFMM strategy and the buy-and-
hold strategy can be decomposed into two distinct components: the performance of the rebalancing
strategy relative to buy-and-hold, and the performance of the CFMM relative to the rebalancing
strategy. The gap between the rebalancing strategy and buy-and-hold is a bet on convergence: the
55

===== PAGE 56 =====

rebalancing strategy makes money if prices converge, and loses if prices diverge. The gap between
the CFMM and the rebalancing strategy, which is the discrete-time version ofL VR, is a systematic
loss from slippage which accrues whenever prices move.
Relationships to option strategies. The binomial tree example also helps illustrate the analogy
between CFMM LP payoffs and European options. The time-2 difference between the payoffs of
the rebalancing strategy and the buy-and-hold strategy is positive when prices mean-revert, and
negative when prices diverge. Hence, payoffs are similar to those of a short European straddle
or strangle position, which involves selling calls and puts which expire after two periods. The
positive payoff when prices revert can be thought of as the option premia collected from selling
the straddle, and the negative payoffs when prices diverge can be thought of as the payouts to
the option buyer, which are made if either the call or the put sold expire in-the-money. The
CFMM LP position has a similar pattern of payoffs, but makes 0 profits if prices end where they
started. An CFMM LP position, ignoring fees, can thus be thought of like giving away a straddle
position, without collecting any upfront option premia. Viewed this way, the equivalence between
the rebalancing strategy and the static European strangle on the binomial tree reflects the classic
idea that static option positions can be replicated by dynamically trading the underlying asset; in
this case, European straddles and strangles are replicated by a strategy which sells the risky asset
when prices increase and buys when prices decrease.
B.2. Weighted Geometric Mean Market Makers
Weighted geometric mean market makers have the special property that the instantaneousL VRper
dollar of pool value, i.e.,ℓ(σ,P )/V (P ), is a constant. The following theorem establishes that these
are essentially the only CFMMs for which this is true:
Theorem 2. Suppose a CFMM satisfies
ℓ(σ,P )
V (P ) =c(σ), ∀ P≥ 0. (40)
Then, we have
V (P ) =L1Pθ(σ) +L2P 1−θ(σ), (41)
56

===== PAGE 57 =====

Panel A: Binomial Tree
P0 = 1.0
PU
1 = 1.4
PUU
2 = 1.8
PUD
2 = 1.0
PD
1 = 0.6
PDU
2 = 1.0
PDD
2 = 0.2
Panel B: Buy and Hold Strategy
Πt = 2.000
(xt, yt) = (1.000, 1.000)
Πt = 2.400
(xt, yt) = (1.000, 1.000)
Πt = 2.800
(xt, yt) = (1.000, 1.000)
Πt = 2.000
(xt, yt) = (1.000, 1.000)
Πt = 1.600
(xt, yt) = (1.000, 1.000)
Πt = 2.000
(xt, yt) = (1.000, 1.000)
Πt = 1.200
(xt, yt) = (1.000, 1.000)
Panel C: Rebalancing Strategy
Πt = 2.000
(xt, yt) = (1.00, 1.00)
Πt = 2.400
(xt, yt) = (0.845, 1.217)
Πt = 2.738
(xt, yt) = (0.756, 1.378)
Πt = 2.062
(xt, yt) = (1.014, 1.048)
Πt = 1.600
(xt, yt) = (1.291, 0.825)
Πt = 2.116
(xt, yt) = (1.032, 1.084)
Πt = 1.084
(xt, yt) = (2.308, 0.622)
Panel D: CFMM LP
Πt = 2.000
(xt, yt) = (1, 1)
Πt = 2.366
(xt, yt) = (0.845, 1.183)
Πt = 2.683
(xt, yt) = (0.745, 1.341)
Πt = 2.000
(xt, yt) = (1.00, 1.00)
Πt = 1.549
(xt, yt) = (1.291, 0.775)
Πt = 2.000
(xt, yt) = (1.00, 1.00)
Πt = 0.894
(xt, yt) = (2.236, 0.447)
Figure 7 : The performance of buy-and-hold, a constant-product CFMM, and the rebalancing strategy,
on a two-step binomial tree. Panel A depicts the binomial tree. The performance of the buy-and-hold
strategy is shown in Panel B; the rebalancing strategy is shown in panel C, and the constant product
CFMM is shown in panel D. In each panel, xt,y t are the holdings of the strategy, and Πt is the pool
value,yt +Ptxt.
57

===== PAGE 58 =====

for free constantsL1,L 2≥ 0, where
θ(σ) ≜ 1−
√
1− 8c(σ)/σ2
2 ≤ 1
2.
Comparing with Example 2, observe that (41) states that is the pool can only be the “sum” of
θ and 1−θ weighted geometric mean market makers. The two degrees of freedom are intuitive,
since θ and 1−θ are exchangeable in (15).
Proof of Theorem 2. We construct the following ODE from the (40) along with (8),
P 2V′′(P ) + ¯cV (P ) = 0,
with constant ¯c ≜ 2c/σ2. Make the substitution P =ez, to arrive at the equivalent ODE,
V′′(z)−V′(z) + ¯cV (z) = 0,
which when solved, along with the known limit condition from (1) that V (z)→ 0 as z→−∞ , by
the usual method of linear ODEs results in the generic solution,
V (P ) =L1P
1−√1−4¯c
2 +L2P
1+√1−4¯c
2 =L1Pθ +L2P 1−θ.
Note that the above calculation is allowed because the quantity under the root is necessarily non-
negative, as if it were not, then V (P ) would not be everywhere concave, which must be the case
by Lemma 1. ■
B.3. Multi-Dimensional Generalization
In this section, we describe the multi-dimensional generalization of our results. Specifically, denote
by vectorsx∈ Rn
+ the reserves inn≥ 2 assets (none of which need be the numéraire), andPt∈ Rn
+
a vector of prices (in terms of the numéraire). We assume that the price vector evolves according
to geometric Brownian motion, i.e.,
dPt = diag(Pt)Σ1/2
t dBQ
t , ∀ t≥ 0,
58

===== PAGE 59 =====

with covariance matrix of returns Σt∈ Rn×n, Σt⪰ 0, and where BQ
t is a standard Q-Brownian
motion on Rn.
Given a bonding function f : Rn
+→ R, define the pool value function V : Rn
+→ R+ according
to
V (P ) ≜ minimize
x∈Rn
+
P⊤x
subject to f(x) =L.
Analogous to Assumption 1, we will assume that an optimal solution x∗(P ) exists for all P∈ Rn
+,
thatV (·) is twice continuously differentiable, and a suitable square-integrability condition onx∗(·).
Analogous to Lemma 1, we have
Lemma 2. For all pricesP∈ Rn
+, the pool value function satisfies:
(i) V (P )≥ 0.
(ii) ∇V (P ) =x∗(P )≥ 0.
(iii) ∇2V (P ) =∇x∗(P )⪯ 0.
Define the rebalancing strategy byxt =x∗(Pt), with value
Rt =V0 +
∫t
0
x∗(Ps)⊤dPs, ∀ t≥ 0.
Then, we have the following multi-dimensional analog of Theorem 1:
Theorem 3. Loss-versus-rebalancing takes the form
L VRt =
∫t
0
ℓ(Σs,Ps)ds, ∀ t≥ 0,
where we define, forP≥ 0, the instantaneous L VR
ℓ(Σ,P ) ≜− 1
2 tr [diag(P )Σ diag(P )∇x∗(P )]≥ 0,
where we have applied Lemma 2. In the case where Σ =σ2I, i.e., i.i.d. assets, we have that
ℓ(Σ,P ) =−σ2
2 tr
[
diag(P )2∇x∗(P )
]
=−σ2
2
n∑
i=1
P 2
i
∂
∂Pi
x∗(P )≥ 0.
59

===== PAGE 60 =====

In particular, L VRis a non-negative, non-decreasing, and predictable process.
Proof. Applying Itô’s lemma to Vt =V (P ),
dVt =∇V (Pt)⊤dPt + 1
2(dPt)⊤∇2V (Pt)dPt
=x∗(Pt)⊤dPt + 1
2 tr
[
Σ1/2
t diag(P )∇2V (Pt) diag(P )Σ1/2
t
]
dt
=dRt−ℓ(Σt,Pt)dt.
The rest of the result follows as in the proof of Theorem 1. ■
C. Data and Measurement
C.1. Data
Prices. We download minute-level USDC-ETH prices from the Binance API. We use close prices
at the end of each minute forPt.
Uniswap. We download data on the Uniswap v2 WETH-USDC pool from Dune Analytics, a data
provider which aggregates data from the Ethereum blockchain into SQL databases. The queries
we use to extract this data are included in Appendix C.2.
Mints and burns. In each minute, we observe the gross amounts of each asset in which are
withdrawn through “burns”, and deposited through “mints”. Let (xmint
t ,y mint
t ) and (xburn
t ,y burn
t )
be the total amounts of each assetx andy which are minted and burned respectively, between time
t− 1 and time t. We will value minted and burned assets at the time-t closing price Pt. Thus, the
monetary value of mints and burns respectively are:
Πmint
t ≜ymint
t +Ptxmint
t , Πburn
t ≜yburn
t +Ptxburn
t .
Let (xt,yt) be the total asset holdings of the pool at timet. As in the model, define the pool value
at time t by
Vt ≜yt +Ptxt.
60

===== PAGE 61 =====

We can calculate ∆LP P&Lt, the change in P&L of the pool, from period t− 1 to t, as
∆LP P&Lt ≜Vt + Πburn
t − Πmint
t −Vt−1. (42)
In words, this is the value of pool reserves at timet valued at pricePt, plus burned assets and minus
minted assets valued at Pt, minus the value of pool reserves at time t− 1 valued at Pt−1. Note
that, in contrast to our simplifying assumption in the model that fees are paid in the numéraire, in
practice in Uniswap v2 fees are paid directly into the pool reserves; hence, the pool P&L includes
transaction fees paid into the pool.
Rebalancing strategy . We rebalance the pool at different time frequencies. For each rebalancing
frequency, we compute the returns of a strategy which at any point in time holds as much ETH as
the pool holds at the start of the period. For example, if the rebalancing frequency is daily, we set
xRB
t at any minutet equal to the LP pool reserves at the start of the day containing the minutet.
We then calculate the returns on the rebalancing strategy using expression (22), that is:
∆RB P&Lt =xRB
t (Pt+1−Pt). (43)
Fees. In each minute, we compute the gross amount of each asset in the pair bought and sold. The
Uniswap v2 pool has a fixed fee rate of 30bps on the contributed asset; we thus calculate fees in
each asset by multiplying the gross amount contributed of each asset by 0.003. Call these feesxfee
t
andyfee
t in period t. We value fees at the periodt price; thus, the monetary value of fees in period
t, which we will call ∆FEEt, is:
∆FEEt ≜yfee
t +Ptxfee
t . (44)
Note also that Uniswap v2 allows for “flash loans”, in which assets are withdrawn and returned
within a single transaction. Flash loans which are accounted for simply as swaps in Uniswap v2;
thus, the calculation in (44) also correctly accounts for flash loans revenues.27
L VR.We compute a realized daily volatility using USDC-ETH prices from the Binance API sampled
at 60 minute intervals. Let ∆L VRt be the increment of L VRin period t. As in Example 3, we then
27See the Uniswap v2 documentation of flash swaps.
61

===== PAGE 62 =====

calculate ∆L VRt simply as
∆L VRt ≜ ˆσ2
t
8 ×Vt× ∆t, (45)
where ˆσt denotes the realized daily volatilty estimate for the day containing period t, and ∆t =
1/(24× 60) corresponds to a one minute period. This is a discrete approximation of (23).
Adding everything up. We then calculate the cumulative returns, the left side of (21), as:
LP P&Lt−
∫t
0
x∗(Ps)dPs ≜
T∑
t=1
(∆P&Lt− ∆RB P&Lt),
using the definitions of∆LP P&Lt and ∆RB P&Lt in (42) and (43) respectively. Note that different
rebalancing frequencies give slightly different values of for ∆RB P&Lt. We calculate the right side
of (21) as:
FEEt− L VRt ≜
T∑
t=1
(∆FEEt− ∆L VRt),
using the definitions of ∆FEEt and ∆L VRt in (44) and (45) respectively.
C.2. Dune SQL Queries
This appendix contains the SQL queries we use on Dune to extract Uniswap v2 WETH-USDC
data.
Mints.
1 SELECT to_char ( evt_block_time , ’ YYYY - MM - DD " T " HH24 : MI : SSOF ’) AS ts , *
2 FROM u n i s w a p _ v 2 . " P a i r _ e v t _ M i n t "
3 WHERE c o n t r a c t _ a d d r e s s = ’\ x b 4 e 1 6 d 0 1 6 8 e 5 2 d 3 5 c a c d 2 c 6 1 8 5 b 4 4 2 8 1 e c 2 8 c 9 d c ’
4 ORDER BY evt_block_number , e vt _i nd ex ASC
Burns.
1 SELECT to_char ( evt_block_time , ’ YYYY - MM - DD " T " HH24 : MI : SSOF ’) AS ts , *
2 FROM u n i s w a p _ v 2 . " P a i r _ e v t _ B u r n "
3 WHERE c o n t r a c t _ a d d r e s s = ’\ x b 4 e 1 6 d 0 1 6 8 e 5 2 d 3 5 c a c d 2 c 6 1 8 5 b 4 4 2 8 1 e c 2 8 c 9 d c ’
4 ORDER BY evt_block_number , e vt _i nd ex ASC
Trades.
1 SELECT
2 d a t e _ t r u n c ( ’ minute ’ , e v t _ b l o c k _ t i m e )AS minute ,
62

===== PAGE 63 =====

3 SUM ( " am o un t0 In " ) as " am ou n t0 In " ,
4 SUM ( " am o un t1 In " ) as " am ou n t1 In " ,
5 SUM ( " a m o u n t 0 O u t " )as " a m o u n t 0 O u t " ,
6 SUM ( " a m o u n t 1 O u t " )as " a m o u n t 1 O u t "
7 FROM u n i s w a p _ v 2 . " P a i r _ e v t _ S w a p "
8 WHERE c o n t r a c t _ a d d r e s s = ’\ x b 4 e 1 6 d 0 1 6 8 e 5 2 d 3 5 c a c d 2 c 6 1 8 5 b 4 4 2 8 1 e c 2 8 c 9 d c ’
9 GROUP BY 1
10 ORDER BY 1 ASC
Pool reserves.
1 SELECT
2 minute ,
3 l a t e s t _ r e s e r v e s [3]AS reserve0 ,
4 l a t e s t _ r e s e r v e s [4]AS reserve1
5 FROM
6 ( SELECT d a t e _ t r u n c ( ’ minute ’ , e v t _ b l o c k _ t i m e )AS minute ,
7 ( SELECT MAX ( ARRAY [ evt_block_number , evt_index , reserve0 , reserve1 ]))
8 AS l a t e s t _ r e s e r v e s
9 FROM u n i s w a p _ v 2 . " P a i r _ e v t _ S y n c "
10 WHERE c o n t r a c t _ a d d r e s s = ’\ x b 4 e 1 6 d 0 1 6 8 e 5 2 d 3 5 c a c d 2 c 6 1 8 5 b 4 4 2 8 1 e c 2 8 c 9 d c ’
11 GROUP BY 1) AS d a y _ r e s e r v e s
12 ORDER BY 1 ASC
63