

===== PAGE 1 =====

Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Financial Economics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec
Product market strategy and corporate policies /p82
Jakub Hajda a , Boris Nikolov b , c , d , ∗
a HEC Montréal, 30 0 0, chemin de la Côte-Sainte-Catherine, Montréal, Québec H3T 2A7, Canada
b Faculty of Business and Economics at the University of Lausanne, Extranef 228, Lausanne CH-1015, Switzerland
c Swiss Finance Institute (SFI), Switzerland
d European Corporate Governance Institute (ECGI), Belgium
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 23 December 2020
Revised 8 September 2022
Accepted 9 September 2022
Available online 14 October 2022
JEL classiﬁcation:
G31
G32
Keywords:
Product market strategy
Product life cycle
Investment
Capital structure
Structural estimation
a b s t r a c t
We examine how product life cycle affects investment and ﬁnancing by estimating an
industry equilibrium model that embeds product portfolio characteristics. In the model,
ﬁrms trade off higher proﬁtability of newer products versus product introduction costs.
Using product-level data, we ﬁnd that the product dimension is critical in quantitatively
explaining cash ﬂow dynamics, corporate policies, and industry structure. We show that
product introductions and capital investment are complements and that product dynamics
incentivize preserving more debt capacity. Our estimates reveal that product life cycle is
more pronounced for ﬁrms with smaller and more concentrated product portfolios as well
as those with high product variety.
©2 0 2 2 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Firms use products to translate their ideas into prof-
its. Product introductions alter ﬁrms’ product portfolios,
which, in turn, inﬂuence their cash ﬂows. As such, prod-
uct dynamics and cash ﬂow dynamics are closely related.
Empirical evidence suggests that within-ﬁrm product cre-
ation and destruction is substantial. For example, ﬁrms
in the consumer goods sector introduce or withdraw on
/p82 Researcher(s) own analyzes calculated (or derived) based in part on
data from The Nielsen Company (US), LLC and marketing databases pro-
vided through the Nielsen Datasets at the Kilts Center for Marketing Data
Center at The University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The conclu-
sions drawn from the Nielsen data are those of the researcher(s) and do
not reﬂect the views of Nielsen. Nielsen is not responsible for, had no role
in, and was not involved in analyzing and preparing the results reported
herein.
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: boris.nikolov@unil.ch (B. Nikolov) .
average 10.8% of products in their portfolios every year
( Argente et al., 2018 ). 1 The large extent of product creation
and destruction can be attributed to product life cycle,
as ﬁrms’ revenue growth crucially depends on either de-
veloping current product lines or introducing novel prod-
ucts (e.g. Levitt, 1965; Argente et al., 2021b ). Thus, the
product-level variation is bound to inﬂuence cash ﬂow dy-
namics and to impact ﬁrms’ policies. Moreover, as ﬁrms
choose not only their product portfolio but also the way
in which it is ﬁnanced and implemented in their real ac-
tivities, product dynamics must be related to investment
and ﬁnancing decisions.
The importance of product dynamics induced by prod-
uct life cycle raises a number of novel questions for ﬁnan-
cial economists. First, how does product life cycle inﬂu-
1 Product dynamics contribute much more to macroeconomic ﬂuctua-
tions than the effects of labor markets or establishment entry and exit
( Broda and Weinstein, 2010 ).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2022.09.003
0304-405X/© 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

===== PAGE 2 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
ence corporate policies? Second, to what extent do ﬁrms’
product portfolio choices affect their investment and ﬁ-
nancing decisions? Third, which product characteristics are
vital in determining ﬁrms’ exposure to product life cycle?
Finally, how quantitatively important are product dynamics
for corporate policies and industry structure?
In this paper, we demonstrate both empirically and
quantitatively that corporate valuations and policies are
better understood when taking into account the charac-
teristics of products, which microfound ﬁrms’ cash ﬂows.
First, we describe the empirical relation between prod-
uct portfolio age and ﬁrms’ investment and ﬁnancing de-
cisions. Second, we develop and estimate a dynamic in-
dustry equilibrium model to understand and quantify the
inﬂuence of the economic mechanisms underpinning the
empirical results. By doing so, we document that product
life cycle has signiﬁcant and economically meaningful im-
plications for corporate policies and industry structure.
To analyze the implications of product life cycle, we re-
construct ﬁrms’ product portfolios by using detailed and
disaggregated product data from Nielsen Homescan. We
focus on ﬁrms’ product portfolio age, measured by the
share of products that exceed half of their lifespan. Prod-
uct portfolio age is related to product life cycle due to
the negative relationship between product-speciﬁc revenue
and age (e.g. Argente et al., 2021b ). An important result
of the paper is to show that this relationship aggregates
to product portfolio level, because product portfolio age is
negatively associated with ﬁrms’ proﬁtability. Crucially, the
effect of product portfolio age on cash ﬂow is markedly
different from that of ﬁrm age. We also document that the
product life cycle channel results in a negative relation-
ship between the market-to-book ratio and product port-
folio age, which implies that managing product portfolios
has direct implications for ﬁrm value. As such, product de-
cisions of value-maximizing ﬁrms should be reﬂected in
their investment and ﬁnancing choices: empirically, both
net leverage and capital investment are also negatively re-
lated to product portfolio age. 2
We rationalize these empirical patterns by develop-
ing and estimating a dynamic industry equilibrium model
of monopolistic competition in which ﬁrms make invest-
ment, ﬁnancing and product decisions. In the model, each
ﬁrm combines capital and products to generate revenue.
It ﬁnances its activities with current cash ﬂow, net debt
subject to a collateral constraint and costly external eq-
uity. Consistent with the product life cycle channel, each
product follows a life-cycle pattern: new products provide
higher revenue than old ones and are expected to last
longer, because old products can exit. When deciding on
introducing a new product to its portfolio, ﬁrms trade off
the beneﬁts, associated with higher and more durable rev-
enue of a younger product portfolio, versus product intro-
duction costs. The fact that ﬁrms can adjust their prod-
uct portfolio has direct implications for cash ﬂow dynam-
2 Using an alternative, text-based approach, Hoberg and Maksi-
movic (2021) document that ﬁrms in the late stage of their product life
cycle have a higher investment- q sensitivity. Our data suggests that in-
vestment policy of ﬁrms with older product portfolios is more sensitive to
Tobin’s q .
ics, and thus connects ﬁrms’ real, ﬁnancial, and product
decisions. By embedding these ﬁrm-level dynamics in an
industry equilibrium framework, we can examine the im-
plications of equilibrium effects for the product life cy-
cle channel as ell as the effects of product-level economic
forces on industry structure. 3
The model provides economic rationale to the empir-
ical stylized facts. First, it shows that capital investment
and product introductions are complements rather than
substitutes, meaning that the ﬁrm expands its product
lines while also investing in production capacity. Firms in-
crease capital investment when introducing new products
because a higher level and durability of revenues associ-
ated with a younger product portfolio increases its incen-
tives to invest in physical capital. However, ﬁrms tend to
invest less as its product portfolio ages, because its rev-
enues decline and become more risky as they are expected
to diminish quicker. Thus, the model rationalizes the nega-
tive relationship between investment and product portfolio
age observed in the data.
Second, the model documents that product life cycle in-
duces stronger precautionary savings motives. In particu-
lar, when the product portfolio ages, ﬁrms have higher in-
centives to preserve debt capacity. This happens because
ﬁrms want to avoid issuing costly external equity ﬁnanc-
ing to ﬁll the revenue gap created by old products becom-
ing obsolete. Firms, however, also tend to increase their
leverage when introducing new products, as they are pre-
dominantly ﬁnanced with debt. As such, the model sheds
light on the economic mechanism driving the negative em-
pirical relationship between leverage and product portfolio
age. Notably, these effects are absent in standard dynamic
model of the ﬁrm that do not account for product portfolio
structure.
Third, our model shows that industry equilibrium ef-
fects have a mitigating effect on ﬁrm-level policies, be-
cause changes in ﬁrm value induced by varying product
characteristics are counterbalanced by an adjustment in
entry cost and industry structure. Thus, the model docu-
ments a close link between product characteristics and in-
dustry concentration and shows that product life cycle can
be an important channel through which industry effects
inﬂuence corporate policies.
To quantify the importance of product life cycle on
corporate policies, we estimate the structural parameters
of the model by matching a set of model-implied mo-
ments to their empirical counterparts. Crucially, the esti-
mation procedure relies on the product portfolio data, as
ﬁrms’ product portfolio structure is indicative of the im-
portance of the product life cycle channel. Thus, the ob-
servable product portfolio characteristics help identify the
two key parameters governing the ﬁrm’s product deci-
sions: the old product revenue discount and the product
introduction cost. We ﬁnd that the estimated model quan-
titatively matches key features of the data, particularly dif-
3 Livdan and Nezlobin (2021) argue that controlling for the vintage
composition of capital stock can help explain ﬁrms’ investment decisions,
as the age of capital affects its proﬁtability. In this paper, a product’s age
affects its revenue as well. However, product introductions are different
from capital investment.
933

===== PAGE 3 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
ferent moments of product portfolio age. Moreover, the
estimates suggest that the product life cycle channel is
quantitatively important, with each old product providing
only 54.2% of a new product’s revenue and the cost of in-
troducing each new products being equal to 0.68% of as-
sets, that is $6.85m for a typical sample ﬁrm. Both esti-
mates are signiﬁcant and substantial in magnitude, sug-
gesting that product-level economic forces are sizeable. We
also document that their effects for industry structure are
important, as higher introduction costs and lower expo-
sure to product life cycle result in a more concentrated
industry.
To understand which features of the data help ex-
plain the exposure to the product life cycle channel, we
study the cross-sectional implications of the model. We
do so by estimating the model on subsamples of ﬁrms.
We ﬁrst study the validity of our setting by splitting ﬁrms
based on their sensitivity to product life cycle. We demon-
strate that ﬁrms whose products are more sensitive to
ageing are also more exposed to the product life cycle
channel. These ﬁrms have a larger estimated old prod-
uct revenue discount, invest more in physical capital and
adopt lower leverage. Hence, the results are in line with
the model’s prediction that stronger product life cycle ef-
fects induce higher precautionary savings incentives, and
that ﬁrm complement product introductions with capital
investment. Second, we create subsamples varying along
two sets of variables: ﬁrm-level characteristics and product
market strategy characteristics. By doing so, we examine
whether the model successfully captures differences across
product dimensions that might not be directly represented
in product data that is aggregated to the ﬁrm level.
We analyze three ﬁrm-level characteristics: product
portfolio size, between-ﬁrm product concentration, and
product uniqueness. We document that ﬁrms with smaller
product portfolios are more exposed to the product life cy-
cle channel, as they face more pronounced old product rev-
enue discount and higher product introduction costs. As
their cash ﬂows are effectively riskier, these ﬁrms adopt
lower leverage ratios. At the same time, ﬁrms supplying
many products tend to have younger product portfolios,
which results in higher, but less volatile proﬁts, highlight-
ing that ﬁrms may also use their product lines as means
of revenue diversiﬁcation. We also show that between-
ﬁrm product concentration strengthens the product life cy-
cle channel. Speciﬁcally, ﬁrms facing lower between-ﬁrm
product concentration are more sensitive to product-level
economic forces, as their products become obsolete faster.
This leads to a higher rate of product introductions, which
translates into their product portfolio structure and feeds
back to investment and ﬁnancing decisions. Finally, we
demonstrate that ﬁrms with more unique products have
higher product introduction costs, but are less exposed to
product life cycle. Given that we use cost of sales as proxy
for product uniqueness, this result means that ﬁrms try to
inﬂuence the exposure to product life cycle by managing
costs such as advertising. We provide evidence that ﬁrms
do so because their products have lower durability, which
incentivizes them to prolong the products’ life cycle.
We focus on three dimensions of ﬁrms’ product mar-
ket strategies: product durability, product offering vari-
ety, and within-ﬁrm product concentration. We show that
ﬁrms supplying more durable products can beneﬁt from
their products for a longer period of time but also face
higher product introduction costs. This is a result of two
opposing forces: on the one hand, these ﬁrms are more
exposed to product life cycle, in that their products lose
a larger chunk of their revenue when ageing. On the other
hand, more durable products also tend to last longer, the
effect of which dominates. Additionally, we demonstrate
that ﬁrms with wider product offering variety are less ex-
posed to product life cycle and face a lower cost of intro-
ducing a new product. These results are consistent with
the notion of product-level diversiﬁcation. Importantly, the
extent of product offering variety also varies with the frac-
tion of capital that can be collateralized, further indicat-
ing that ﬁrms might use the intangible capital inherent in
product brands as collateral. The last sample split concerns
the notion of within-ﬁrm product concentration. We ﬁnd
that ﬁrms with more concentrated product portfolios are
more exposed to product life cycle and have higher prod-
uct introduction costs than ﬁrms following a more diversi-
ﬁed product market strategy. The results reinforce the no-
tion that product market strategy is used by ﬁrms to miti-
gate the effects of product life cycle. This means that both
the number of products and the structure of their sales are
important dimensions to consider when studying the effect
of product market strategy on corporate policies.
Overall, the cross-sectional results highlight that the es-
timated model provides insights on how different dimen-
sions of ﬁrms’ product characteristics and product market
strategy affect corporate policies. The empirical evidence
shows that both between- and within-ﬁrm product mar-
ket forces are important determinants of investment and
ﬁnancing decisions.
The last contribution of the paper is to provide evidence
that the product life cycle channel has quantitatively im-
portant implications for corporate policies and ﬁrm valua-
tion. First, counterfactual experiments related to the sever-
ity of life cycle effects suggest that a 1% decrease in the
revenue gap between new and old products increases ﬁrm
value by 0.083%. Similarly, lowering the product intro-
duction costs by 1% results in a 0.068% increase in ﬁrm
value, indicating that costs related to product introduction
are economically signiﬁcant. Firms’ proﬁtability and corpo-
rate policies are also greatly affected by the product-level
parameters. Hence, the counterfactual experiments imply
that managing the life cycle of products, by means of intro-
duction cost or sensitivity to ageing, yields material ben-
eﬁts to ﬁrms. Second, we show that product-level char-
acteristics are important determinants of industry struc-
ture. In particular, more severe product life cycle effects
result in less concentrated industry, while higher product
introduction costs increase industry concentration. This in-
dicates that product life cycle and industry concentration
are inherently related. Third, we demonstrate that prod-
uct characteristics largely inﬂuence the precautionary sav-
ings incentives of the ﬁrm. More severe product life cy-
cle effects result in stronger precautionary savings motives,
as the ﬁrm can lose a large fraction of revenue when its
products age. Similarly, less frequent product introductions
lower the ﬁrm’s incentives to preserve debt capacity, be-
934

===== PAGE 4 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
cause product introductions require less ﬁnancing. These
effects are lar ge: for exam ple, when eliminating the prod-
uct life cycle channel, the ﬁrm would essentially double its
leverage ratio.
We also carry out a host of robustness tests to better
understand the performance of our model and the inﬂu-
ence of channels that could affect our results. First, we
show that our model is able to generate out-of-sample
moments of similar sign and magnitude. Second, we ex-
tend our model to study the effect of endogenous product
withdrawal, product cannibalization, as well as the product
portfolio implications for debt and equity ﬁnancing. The
extensions support the key mechanism between product
life cycle and corporate policies. All in all, the results fur-
ther highlight the fact that ﬁrms’ internal product setting,
which can be diﬃcult to observe in the data or may be
concealed as a ﬁrm ﬁxed effect, matters for ﬁrm value, and
that the effects of product characteristics are large.
1.1. Related literature
This paper contributes to several strands of litera-
ture. First, the paper adds to the literature that uses
dynamic models to quantitatively explain corporate in-
vestment and ﬁnancing policies. Recent examples in-
clude Gomes (2001) , Hennessy and Whited (20 05, 20 07) ,
DeAngelo et al. (2011) , Morellec et al. (2012, 2018) , Taylor
(2010, 2013) , Nikolov and Whited (2014) , Glover (2015) ,
Wu (2018) , or Nikolov et al. (2018, 2021) . We contribute to
this literature by explicitly considering ﬁrms’ product port-
folio decisions. In particular, we show that product dynam-
ics inﬂuence ﬁrms’ cash ﬂow dynamics and matter quanti-
tatively for ﬁrms’ investment and ﬁnancing decisions.
To this end, the paper is also related to the growing
literature on the relationship between corporate strategy
and corporate policies, e.g. Titman (1984) , Hellmann and
Puri (20 0 0) , Parsons and Titman (20 08) , Gourio and
Rudanko (2014) , Clayton (2017) , D’Acunto et al. (2018) or
Hoberg and Maksimovic (2021) . We differ from this litera-
ture by focusing explicitly on ﬁrms’ product market strat-
egy and showing that cash ﬂow dynamics and corporate
policies are affected by ﬁrms’ product portfolio charac-
teristics other than pricing policy, as documented by e.g.
D’Acunto et al. (2018) . In that respect, this paper is most
closely related to Hoberg and Maksimovic (2021) , who in-
fer ﬁrms’ life cycle stage from a text-based measure of
product life cycle and study its implications for investment.
Hoberg and Maksimovic (2021) document that product life
cycle matters for ﬁrms’ investment- q sensitivity, as the in-
vestment policy of ﬁrms in the late stage of their product
life cycle is more sensitive to Tobin’s q . Our papers offers
a complementary view on the importance of the product
dimension for corporate policies by directly using disag-
gregated product-level data and by providing quantitative
evidence of its signiﬁcance.
The paper also adds to the literature on how prod-
uct market characteristics affect corporate ﬁnancing pol-
icy, e.g. Spence (2009) , Maksimovic (1988) , Phillips (1995) ,
Chevalier (1995a,b) , Kovenock and Phillips (1995, 1997) ,
MacKay (2003) , Frésard (2010) , and Valta (2012) . In con-
trast to these papers, we focus on within-ﬁrm product mar-
ket characteristics, that is the product market strategy and
we argue that internal product market setting is an im-
portant determinant of corporate investment and ﬁnancing
policies.
Finally, the paper is related to the literature on
multiple-product ﬁrms such as Broda and Wein-
stein (2010) , Bernard et al. (2010) , Hottman et al. (2016) ,
Argente et al. (2018, 2021b) , and Argente et al. (2021a) ,
who study the reasons why ﬁrms choose to supply mul-
tiple goods. In contrast to these papers, we analyze the
corporate ﬁnance implications of product portfolio choice.
2. Data and stylized facts
In this section, we analyze the empirical relation be-
tween product life cycle and corporate policies. Product
life cycle implies a negative relationship between product-
speciﬁc revenue and product age (e.g. Levitt, 1965; Argente
et al., 2021b ). We focus on product portfolio age as the
measure of ﬁrms’ exposure to product life cycle and show
that the product-level life cycle effects naturally translate
to the product portfolio level, resulting in a negative re-
lationship between product portfolio age and proﬁtabil-
ity. We document that corporate investment and ﬁnancing
policy are both negatively related to product portfolio age
when controlling for other ﬁrm characteristics, indicating
that product life cycle constitutes an important and novel
source of variation in corporate policies.
2.1. Data sources
We use the data from Nielsen Homescan (NH) to re-
construct ﬁrms’ product portfolios. The data set contains
information on prices and quantities of nondurable con-
sumer goods sold in the US over the period of 2004–2018.
The product data is comprehensive, as it covers about
66% of expenditure on goods in CPI ( Broda and Wein-
stein, 2010 ), and detailed, as it contains vastly more infor-
mation about products than other data sets such as BLS.
To study the effects of product life cycle on corporate poli-
cies, we merge NH with ﬁnancial data from quarterly Com-
pustat. Appendix A provides a detailed description of the
data and the merging procedure. Appendix B contains def-
initions of variables used throughout the paper.
2.1.1. Deﬁning a product
One crucial aspect of NH concerns the deﬁnition of a
product, which is important given the notion of product
life cycle as well as the measurement of product portfo-
lio age. In principle, NH allows for many different notions
of a product. For example, one could assume that ﬁrms
supply a representative good, indicating a very wide no-
tion of a product. Another approach would be to take a
more narrow view of a product that would, e.g., differ-
entiate between varieties of the same good. In this sub-
section we consider three deﬁnitions of a product to de-
scribe the data: a UPC code (most granular; can be as-
sociated with a particular variety of a product), a brand-
module (intermediate granularity; can be considered a par-
ticular brand of a product) and a product group (least
935

===== PAGE 5 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
Table 1
Comparison of product characteristics across different samples. The table
compares product characteristics in the Nielsen Homescan (NH) sample,
the matched sample of public ﬁrms and the sample of ﬁrms with sub-
stantial exposure to retail product sales. Market shares are computed at
the product group-level. Net product entry is the difference between the
share of entering products and the share of exiting products at the ﬁrm-
level. Net product creation is the difference between the share of the rev-
enues of the entering products and the share of the revenue of the exiting
products at the ﬁrm-level. Share of aggregate revenue (share of all UPCs)
is the portion of aggregate product revenue (aggregate number of UPCs)
that can be attributed to each sample, as compared to NH. Establishments
are ﬁrms identiﬁed in NH. Appendix B provides a description of all vari-
ables.
NH Public Matched
Average # of UPC 57.2 595.9 527.0
Average # of brand-modules 8.8 56.1 67.4
Average # of product groups 2.4 7.3 7.0
Average net product entry 0.7% 0.4% 0.4%
Average net product creation 0.5% 0.3% 0.1%
Average market share (all markets) 0.5% 1.9% 3.0%
Share of aggregate revenue 100% 46.8% 27.1%
Share of all UPC 100% 25.1% 7.8%
# establishments 38386 1116 389
# public ﬁrms 702 108
granular; can be related to particular product market). 4
Table 1 presents the summary statistics of several prod-
uct characteristics in three different samples: the Nielsen
Homescan, all matched public ﬁrms, and the sample of
public ﬁrms with substantial exposure to retail product
sales.
The data shows that ﬁrms vary substantially in the
number of supplied products. In particular, an average
public ﬁrm supplies roughly 9 times as many UPC codes,
6 times as many brand-modules and operates in 3 times
as many product groups, than an average ﬁrm in NH. The
average net product entry and net product creation rates
of matched public ﬁrms are, however, lower than those
of NH ﬁrms, due to the size of their product portfolios.
Table 1 also documents that while public ﬁrms supply
≈ 25% of all products in the market, sales of these products
constitute ≈ 47% of the total product revenue in NH. This
result highlights that analyzing product market strategies
of public ﬁrms is important, even though there are rela-
tively fewer public than private ﬁrms in the data. More-
over, ﬁrms in the matched sample supply roughly as many
products as all public ﬁrms, but their sales correspond to
a smaller share of aggregate sales. This happens because
this sample contains fewer ﬁrms which operate in fewer
industries. However, they also possess substantial exposure
to retail product sales. Finally, while public ﬁrms operate
in roughly 7.3 markets at once, their average market share
in these markets is fairly low, 1.9% on average, which rein-
forces the notion that nondurable consumer good market
in the US is fairly competitive.
4 Table A.2 in Appendix A presents the summary statistics of the num-
ber of supplied products using other deﬁnitions. The stylized facts pre-
sented in this section are qualitatively robust to employing alternative
deﬁnitions of a product.
Table 2
Comparison of product portfolio dynamics. The table presents the dynam-
ics of product introductions and withdrawals as well as the evolution of
product portfolio characteristics over time across three different product
classiﬁcations: product groups (PG), brand-modules (B-M) and UPCs. The
results are computed using the ﬁnal ﬁltered sample of ﬁrms matched to
Compustat. Panel A presents the average/median entry and exit rates. En-
try rate is the share of entering products in a ﬁrm’s product portfolio. Exit
rate is the share of exiting products in a ﬁrm’s product portfolio. Panel
B presents the average number of products over time. Panel C presents
the average product revenue concentration over time. Revenue concen-
tration is computed using HHI of product revenue corresponding to a par-
ticular deﬁnition of a product and adjusted for the number of products.
Appendix B provides a description of all variables.
PG B-M UPC
Panel A : Product entry and exit dynamics
Average entry rate 0.3% 1.1% 1.9%
Average exit rate 0.3% 0.7% 1.6%
Median entry rate 0.0% 0.0% 1.4%
Median exit rate 0.0% 0.0% 1.2%
Panel B : Average number of products
< 2008 14.510 134.133 795.289
2009 −2012 14.292 128.995 769.933
> 2013 14.137 130.479 728.892
Panel C : Average product revenue concentration
< 2008 0.1259 0.1180 0.0391
2009 −2012 0.1236 0.1193 0.0383
> 2013 0.1267 0.1081 0.0385
Having established that product characteristics differ
across the three samples, we now focus on the differences
between the three deﬁnitions of a product and on time
trends. In Panel A of Table 2 , we investigate the dynamics
of product entry and exit as well as the trends in prod-
uct portfolio characteristics in the actual and ﬁnal sample
of ﬁrms used in the paper. 5 Overall, we ﬁnd that the ex-
tent of product dynamics, and thus product life cycle, is
much greater when considering more granular deﬁnitions
of a product. For example, the average entry rate is more
than three times higher in brand-modules as compared to
product groups and more than six times higher in UPCs
than in product groups. The differences in median prod-
uct entry and exit rates are even starker, as the median
product entry and exit rates are zero for product groups
and brand modules, while only slightly smaller than the
averages for UPCs, highlighting that the most action in the
product space is taking place at the most granular level.
Panels B and C of Table 2 document how the average
number of products as well as the average product revenue
concentration evolve over time according to each deﬁnition
of a product. The results suggest that the number of prod-
ucts supplied is fairly stable across time and deﬁnitions.
The same is true for the average product revenue concen-
tration, computed at the level corresponding to each prod-
uct deﬁnition: while the HHIs are the higher, the coarser
5 The average number of products is higher in Table 2 than in
Table 1 due to further ﬁltering of Compustat data. Appendix A provides
an overview of all the data processing steps and data ﬁlters.
936

===== PAGE 6 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
the product deﬁnition, the averages remain at similar lev-
els over time.
Our results suggest that focusing on a wide deﬁnition of
a product would to a large extent neglect the product-level
dynamics that are of crucial importance in this paper. As
such, the results motivate focusing on the UPC-level deﬁ-
nition of a product, given that it allows to investigate the
life cycle of each individual product and to construct a pre-
cise measure of product portfolio age.
Finally, evidence in Tables 1 and 2 provides support for
the interpretation of a new product that is an old product
offering a minor change to the ﬁrm’s existing product port-
folio. This change is mostly driven by changing consumer
taste or by a decline in perceived product quality. Impor-
tantly, in our sample, new products do not exhibit large
changes that would come, for example, from R&D innova-
tion. 6
2.2. Product portfolio age
To measure product portfolio age, we follow Melser and
Syed (2015) and Argente et al. (2018, 2021b) . We deﬁne
our measure as the weighted share of old products, whose
age exceeds half of their lifespan 7 , in the product portfolio,
where the weights correspond to product-speciﬁc revenue:
age it = weighted # of products with age exceeding 50% of lifespan (it)
total weighted # of products (it) .
(1)
As such, our measure captures the effective age of ﬁrm’s
i product portfolio in quarter t. Measuring product portfo-
lio age this way allows us to directly link the data to the
model, in which the products will also change between the
two states, as prescribed by product life cycle. Measuring
product portfolio age also requires observing both entry
and exit of each product. As such, we only use the data
on products which were introduced and withdrawn during
our sample period. 8
The average ﬁrm in our sample has 44.5% of old prod-
ucts, as indicated by Panel A of Table 3 . Product port-
folio age varies substantially as its standard deviation is
0.325 and a further variance decomposition into within-
and between-ﬁrm effects suggests that as much as 80% of
the variance can be attributed to within-ﬁrm variation. The
average product portfolio age is slightly higher when prod-
ucts are not weighted by their revenues (0.512) and when
products are deﬁned at a brand-module rather than UPC
level (0.519). Taking a higher than 50% threshold for the
proxy results in a smaller share of older products (0.315 for
6 In our sample, about half of the ﬁrms do not issues patents. Moreover,
we ﬁnd that issuance of patents does not consistently lead to product
introductions. These results are available upon request.
7 Argente et al. (2021b) provide evidence that the decline in product-
speciﬁc revenue can start as early as at the end of the ﬁrst year for prod-
ucts lasting at least 4 years and that it varies with product duration. Thus,
using half of the lifespan is conservative.
8 In the Internet Appendix, we consider several alternative deﬁnitions
of product portfolio age as well as alternative breakpoints for half of the
lifespan. We show that these deﬁnitions produce qualitatively and quan-
titatively similar results.
Fig. 1. Histogram of product portfolio age. Appendix B provides a descrip-
tion of all variables.
75% threshold and 0.202 for 90% threshold), but the varia-
tion between- and within- ﬁrms remains fairly high.
The large variation in product portfolio age is also ev-
ident in its distribution shown in Fig. 1 . In particular,
there are many observations of ﬁrms with only new and
only old products. Finally, product portfolio age and ﬁrm
age are only weakly positively related, with the correla-
tion coeﬃcient of 0.03, suggesting that product portfolio
age can provide additional information above and beyond
ﬁrm age. This result is expected given the evidence of, e.g.,
Hoberg and Maksimovic (2021) , documenting that ﬁrms
transition from being an ‘old’ product life cycle ﬁrm to a
‘new.’
2.2.1. Other product portfolio characteristics
While product portfolio age is our main variable of in-
terest measuring the exposure to product life cycle, other
product portfolio characteristics may interact with product
life cycle as well. We focus on two such characteristics:
product portfolio size and product portfolio adjustments.
A comparison between Tables 2 and 3 suggests that the
average effective number of products ( ≈ 63 ) is much lower
than the raw one ( ≈ 765 ). 9 This implies that not only do
public ﬁrms differ in the number of products supplied, but
also that the majority of their revenues can be attributed
to a small number of products, supporting the notion that
product revenues are fairly concentrated (e.g. Clara et al.,
2021; Benkard et al., 2021 ). Moreover, product portfolio
size and product portfolio age are negatively correlated,
implying that ﬁrms with older product portfolios have on
average fewer products.
The average product portfolio adjustment, proxied by
net product entry, amounts to 0.4% each quarter. This cor-
responds to an average sample ﬁrm introducing 3.5 prod-
ucts each quarter, which increase its retail sales by roughly
1.2%, suggesting that within-ﬁrm product-level dynamics
have important implications for cash ﬂow dynamics. The
ﬁrm-speciﬁc average net product creation is nearly twice
9 The effective number of products equals the inverse of the product-
level revenue concentration, measured using the normalized HHI of each
ﬁrm’s product revenue, see Appendix B for details.
937

===== PAGE 7 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
Table 3
Summary statistics of product portfolio and ﬁrm characteristics. Age is the share of old products in product portfolio, that is those exceeding half of their
lifespan. Size is the number of products in product portfolio. Adjustments is the net product entry, that is the difference between the share of entering
products in a ﬁrm’s product portfolio and the share of exiting products. Market-to-book is the market value of equity plus book value of debt over total
assets. Investment is capital investment over gross plant, property and equipment. Book leverage is book debt over total assets. Cash is cash and short-
term investments over total assets. Firm size is the log of deﬂated total assets. Proﬁtability is operating proﬁts over total assets. Firm age is deﬁned as in
Loderer et al. (2017) . All variables are winsorized at 2.5% and 97.5% percentile. Appendix B provides a description of all variables.
Panel A : Summary statistics
age size adjustment market-to-book investment book lev. cash ﬁrm size proﬁtability ﬁrm age
Mean 0.444 62.735 0.004 1.478 0.021 0.172 0.090 6.657 0.040 -0.068
p50 0.403 37.633 0.000 1.356 0.017 0.207 0.056 6.871 0.038 -0.036
sd 0.325 60.604 0.028 0.820 0.016 0.231 0.095 2.267 0.024 0.077
Count 2319 2319 2319 2319 2319 2319 2319 2319 2319 2313
Panel B : Pairwise correlations
age size adjustments market-to-book investment book lev. cash ﬁrm size proﬁtability ﬁrm age
Age 1
Size -0.060 ∗∗ 1
Adjustments -0.098 ∗∗∗ 0.005 1
Market-to-book 0.055 ∗∗ 0.052 ∗ 0.091 ∗∗∗ 1
Investment -0.072 ∗∗∗ -0.082 ∗∗∗ 0.056 ∗∗ 0.201 ∗∗∗ 1
Book leverage 0.048 ∗ 0.324 ∗∗∗ -0.040 -0.395 ∗∗∗ -0.109 ∗∗∗ 1
Cash 0.007 -0.278 ∗∗∗ 0.030 0.455 ∗∗∗ 0.148 ∗∗∗ -0.784 ∗∗∗ 1
Firm size 0.015 0.449 ∗∗∗ -0.015 -0.037 -0.172 ∗∗∗ 0.400 ∗∗∗ -0.311 ∗∗∗ 1
Proﬁtability -0.037 0.120 ∗∗∗ 0.078 ∗∗∗ 0.622 ∗∗∗ 0.106 ∗∗∗ -0.220 ∗∗∗ 0.300 ∗∗∗ 0.141 ∗∗∗ 1
Firm age 0.026 0.132 ∗∗∗ -0.047 ∗ 0.084 ∗∗∗ -0.125 ∗∗∗ -0.069 ∗∗∗ -0.014 0.245 ∗∗∗ 0.117 ∗∗∗ 1
as small as the one in the full NH sample ( Table 1 ), imply-
ing that a large share of product creation and destruction
takes place in private ﬁrms. Finally, product portfolio ad-
justments are negatively related to product portfolio age.
This means that ﬁrms with older product portfolios also
introduce new products less often. 10
2.3. Product life cycle, cash ﬂow, and proﬁtability
An important result of the paper is to show that
the notion of product life cycle of Levitt (1965) and
Abernathy and Utterback (1978) can be generalized to
the ﬁrm-level. The left graph in Panel A of Fig. 2 docu-
ments that ﬁrms with older product portfolios have lower
proﬁtability. This means that individual-product life cycle
and product portfolio age are closely related. As such, the
proxy passes the ‘sanity check’ of matching the ﬁndings of
Argente et al. (2021b) by using ﬁrm- rather than product-
level data. Therefore, the product life cycle provides a nat-
ural channel through which product-level economic forces
interact with corporate policies.
The fact that product portfolios consist of individual
products, together with product life cycle, jointly imply
that ﬁrms’ cash ﬂow should be directly affected by both
product portfolio age and product introductions. We pro-
vide two distinctive pieces of evidence to argue that this is
indeed the case.
Firm characteristics We ﬁrst document how product
life cycle affects cash ﬂow dynamics through the lens of
different ﬁrm characteristics. The right graph in Panel A of
Fig. 2 shows that product portfolio age is tightly related
10 In the Internet Appendix, we provide further empirical evidence
about the relationship between these product portfolio characteristics and
corporate policies.
to product sales growth, which declines as product portfo-
lio ages. The economic signiﬁcance is substantial: product
revenues of ﬁrms with younger product portfolios grow by
about 1.7% annually, largely due to new product introduc-
tions. On the other hand, revenue growth of ﬁrms with old
product portfolios is close to zero. These numbers are con-
sistent with the observed decline in proﬁtability.
The left graph in Panel B of Fig. 2 shows that ﬁrms
with youngest and oldest product portfolios have on av-
erage higher cash ﬂow volatility. This result stem from the
fact that older products carry higher risk, due to the de-
cline in revenue as well as the chance of becoming obso-
lete. Finally, the cost of sales, presented in the right graph
in Panel B of Fig. 2 , is a u-shaped function of product port-
folio age. Provided that this variable proxies for ﬁrms’ mar-
keting expenses, the shape is intuitive: ﬁrms with younger
products must devote more resources to introducing new
products and to advertising. Similarly, ﬁrms with older
products may try to prolong the lifespan of their products
by devoting more resources to marketing.
Importantly, product life cycle has different implications
for ﬁrm characteristics than ﬁrm life cycle, as proxied by
ﬁrm age in Panel C of Fig. 2 . Both proﬁtability and product
sales growth tend to increase, on average, as ﬁrm age in-
creases. As such, we provide further evidence that product
and ﬁrm life cycle could have distinctive implications for
ﬁrms.
Product introductions If the inﬂuence of product life
cycle on corporate policies operates through ﬁrms’ cash
ﬂow dynamics, the effect of product introductions and
withdrawals on cash ﬂow should be substantial. To inves-
tigate this claim, we analyze how ﬁrms’ operating rev-
enues and expenses, adjusted for R&D as in Peters and
Taylor (2017) , change around quarters in which ﬁrms in-
troduce new products and withdraw old products. We do
938

===== PAGE 8 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
Fig. 2. Product portfolio age, ﬁrm age and ﬁrm characteristics. The ﬁgure shows how proﬁtability and product revenue growth change with product
portfolio age (Panel A) and ﬁrm age (Panel C) and how cash ﬂow volatility and cost of sales relate to product portfolio age (Panel B). The solid lines are
obtained from local polynomial regressions of each variable on the product portfolio age or ﬁrm age proxy using an Epanechnikov kernel function with a
rule-of-thumb bandwidth estimator and local-mean smoothing. All variables are winsorized at 2.5% and 97.5% percentile. Appendix B provides a description
of all variables.
so by regressing each log-transformed variable on a vari-
able proxying the change in the number of products in the
portfolio, as well as ﬁrm- and time ﬁxed effects.
Panel A of Table 4 shows that the average sales are 4.0%
higher in quarters when the number of products increases,
while the average cost of goods sold and selling costs are
3.3% and 2.3% higher, respectively. These effects are even
stronger when conditioning on the number of products in-
troduced, e.g. average sales are 5.9% higher when ﬁrms
introduce more products than a typical ﬁrm in a given
quarter. The impact of product introduction on revenues
is persistent, but tends to become weaker over time. For
939

===== PAGE 9 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
Table 4
The effect of product introductions and withdrawals on cash ﬂow and
operating costs. The table shows the change in average sales, cost of
goods sold and selling costs when introducing new products (Panel A)
or withdrawing old products (Panel B) today. Product introductions and
withdrawals are measured by increases and decreases, respectively, in the
number of UPC codes. Each entry in the table is the percent change in
the variable of interest in current quarter as well as 4 and 8 quarters for-
ward, following product introductions or withdrawals. The changes result
from regressing the log variable of interest on the variable proxying the
change in the number of products in the portfolio, while controlling for
ﬁrm and time ﬁxed effects. The ‘dummy’ row is equal to one if product
stock increases (decreases). The below/ above median + rows split the pos-
itive (negative) changes in product stock into two equally-sized groups;
the reference group being ﬁrms with no increase (decrease) in the num-
ber of products. All variables are winsorized at 2.5% and 97.5% percentile.
Appendix B provides a description of all variables.
Panel A: Product introductions
Sales
t t + 4 t + 8
dummy 4.0% 3.4% 3.0%
below median + 2.2% 1.9% 1.9%
above median + 5.9% 5.0% 4.1%
Cost of goods sold
t t + 4 t + 8
dummy 3.3% 3.0% 2.2%
below median + 0.8% 0.9% 0.6%
above median + 6.2% 5.2% 3.9%
Selling costs
t t + 4 t + 8
dummy 2.3% 1.8% 1.9%
below median + 1.3% 0.0% 0.2%
above median + 3.3% 3.7% 3.6%
Panel B : Product withdrawals
Sales
t t + 4 t + 8
dummy -2.3% -2.1% -2.0%
below median + -3.3% -2.0% -1.9%
above median + -1.1% -2.3% -2.2%
Cost of goods sold
t t + 4 t + 8
dummy -1.1% -1.3% -0.9%
below median + -2.3% -1.5% -1.5%
above median + 0.2% -1.0% -0.3%
Selling costs
t t + 4 t + 8
dummy -1.2% -0.7% -1.2%
below median + -3.3% -1.2% -1.0%
above median + 1.1% -0.2% -1.5%
example, a product introduction is associated with 3.0%
higher average sales 8 quarters after the introduction took
place, thus 25% lower than the contemporaneous effect.
The average cost of goods sold is 3.3% higher when ﬁrms
introduce new products and only 2.2% higher after 8 quar-
ters, closely following the effect of sales. The pattern fol-
lowed by selling costs, which can be viewed as a proxy
for marketing expenses, is similar: selling costs increase on
average by 2.3% in quarters when the number of products
increases, and the effect subsides over time.
Panel B of Table 4 illustrates how these three variables
are affected by product withdrawals. In quarters when the
size of the product stock shrinks, the average revenues
tend to decrease and are are 2.3% lower, while the average
cost of goods sold and selling costs are 1.1% and 1.2% lower,
respectively. Overall, our results indicate that product in-
troductions and withdrawals have a substantial effect on
cash ﬂow dynamics, further highlighting the importance of
product life cycle.
2.4. Product portfolio age and corporate policies
Having documented that product portfolio age affects
cash ﬂow dynamics and that it is negatively associated
with ﬁrms’ proﬁtability, the natural question that arises
is whether product life cycle also has implications for
ﬁrm value. In other words, do value-maximizing ﬁrms care
about managing product portfolio age?
To answer this question, the top graph in Panel A of
Fig. 3 presents the relationship between product portfo-
lio age and the unexplained part of the market-to-book ra-
tio. The ﬁgure documents that ﬁrm value declines with the
share of old products. In other words, product portfolio age
has direct implications for ﬁrm value. The fact that the re-
lationship is robust to controlling for other ﬁrm character-
istics (as in Loderer et al., 2017 ) again highlights the incre-
mental information conveyed by product portfolio age. 11
Given that product life cycle may inﬂuence the behav-
ior of value-maximizing ﬁrms, it should also have an effect
on ﬁrms’ investment and ﬁnancing policy. The middle and
bottom graphs in Panel A of Fig. 3 indicate that both resid-
ualized investment and net leverage tend to decline with
product portfolio age. Importantly, the fact that the lines
are not ﬂat indicates that product portfolio age provides
economically signiﬁcant additional explanatory power in
standard leverage or investment regressions. For example,
the within- R 2 of the leverage regression, with speciﬁcation
identical to the one employed in Fig. 4 , increases from 4.9
to 5.5%, that is by roughly 11%. For investment regression
it increases by 6%.
As a robustness check, in Panel B of Fig. 3 we docu-
ment that controlling for ﬁrm age does not affect the re-
lationship between product life cycle and corporate poli-
cies: all the ﬁgures are qualitatively similar. This result fol-
lows from two facts: ﬁrm age being closely correlated with
other ﬁrm characteristics such as ﬁrm size, hence provid-
ing limited additional explanatory power, and ﬁrm age and
product portfolio age being uncorrelated. Overall, the re-
sults in Panel B of Fig. 3 suggest that controlling for prod-
uct life cycle is important above and beyond the effects of
ﬁrm life cycle.
The empirical relationships are also intuitive. The de-
cline in the investment rate is consistent with the notion
11 Fig. A.3 in the Internet Appendix presents the raw relationships be-
tween product portfolio age, ﬁrm value, investment and net leverage.
940

===== PAGE 10 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
Fig. 3. The relationship between product portfolio age and ﬁrms’ unexplained market-to-book, investment and leverage. The solid lines are obtained from
local polynomial regressions of each variable on the product portfolio age proxy using an Epanechnikov kernel function with a rule-of-thumb bandwidth
estimator and local-mean smoothing. The controls used to compute the predicted values in Panel A include proﬁtability, investment, leverage, size, cash
ﬂow volatility for market-to-book, proﬁtability, size, cash ﬂow volatility, market-to-book and tangibility for leverage, and size, cash ﬂow, and market-to-
book for investment. The controls in Panel B also include ﬁrm age. All models control for ﬁrm and time ﬁxed effects. All variables are winsorized at 2.5%
and 97.5% percentile. Appendix B provides a description of all variables.
that product and capital investment are complements, that
will be later formally conﬁrmed by the model. The ratio-
nale behind the decline in net leverage is twofold. First,
when ﬁrms’ product portfolios age, that is when they do
not replace their ageing products by new ones, ﬁrms are at
risk of abruptly losing their revenues and prefer to pursue
a more conservative ﬁnancing policy in case their revenues
vanish. Second, it also makes ﬁrms more risky. These ef-
fects result in a substitution between debt and cash ﬁnanc-
ing: cash holdings increase and debt issuance decreases
and hence net leverage declines. 12
12 In Fig. A.2 of the Internet Appendix, we investigate the robustness
of these results by using other deﬁnitions of product portfolio age. The
results imply that all different measures produce qualitatively similar re-
lationship between product portfolio age and investment. In Fig. A.4 in
the Internet Appendix we show explicitly that ﬁrm age is differently re-
lated to residualized investment and leverage, as both tend to increase on
average as ﬁrms age.
941

===== PAGE 11 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
Fig. 4. Assessing the signiﬁcance of product portfolio age for corporate policies. All graphs are obtained from local polynomial regressions of the residuals
from an investment (or leverage) regression on a given variable, using an Epanechnikov kernel function with a rule-of-thumb bandwidth estimator and
local-mean smoothing. The controls used to compute the investment residuals include size, cash ﬂow, and market-to-book. The controls used to compute
the leverage residuals include proﬁtability, size, cash ﬂow volatility, market-to-book, share of old products, and tangibility for proﬁtability and proﬁtability,
size, cash ﬂow volatility, market-to-book, and share of old products for tangibility. All regression models control for ﬁrm and time ﬁxed effects. All variables
are winsorized at 2.5% and 97.5% percentile. Appendix B provides a description of all variables.
One remaining issue to address is whether the magni-
tudes of the reduced-form relationships in Fig. 3 are eco-
nomically meaningful. To show that the effects of prod-
uct portfolio age are indeed signiﬁcant, we compare how
other ﬁrm characteristics, which are considered standard
determinants of investment and capital structure, fare in
explaining residualized investment or leverage, when con-
trolling for all other variables. For each policy, we focus on
two such characteristics: size and market-to-book for in-
vestment as well as proﬁtability and tangibility for lever-
age. The results are presented in Fig. 4 . The graphs show
that each variable correlates with the corresponding policy
in an intuitive way, e.g. investment and market-to-book are
positively related, while proﬁtability is negatively related
to leverage. More importantly, the graphs suggest that the
economic magnitude of product portfolio age is larger than
that of size and comparable to those of market-to-book for
investment, while at least comparable to that of tangibility,
and slightly smaller than that of proﬁtability for leverage.
Therefore, the results again reinforce the notion that prod-
uct portfolio age constitutes an important and novel source
of variation in corporate policies.
In summary, the stylized facts presented in this sec-
tion showcase a non-trivial relationship between ﬁrms’ ex-
posure to product life cycle, as captured by product port-
folio age, and corporate policies. However, the presented
empirical evidence makes it diﬃcult to formulate state-
ments regarding the quantitative importance of product
characteristics. Isolating product-level forces is challenging
in a reduced-form setting, because ﬁnancial data is essen-
tially observed at the ﬁrm- rather than product-level. So,
we turn now to examining the quantitative implication of
product life cycle for ﬁnancing and investment through the
lens of a structural model. The structural approach allows
us to investigate the importance of frictions driving prod-
uct portfolio adjustments and to study how they translate
to variation in corporate policies and ultimately to ﬁrm
value.
3. Model
In this section, we develop a discrete-time dynamic
model in which a ﬁrm makes optimal ﬁnancing, invest-
ment, and product portfolio decisions. We embed the
942

===== PAGE 12 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
model in an industry equilibrium of monopolistic compe-
tition to study how industry structure interacts with ﬁrms’
product portfolio decisions.
3.1. Firm and industry structure
There exists a mass F of monopolistic ﬁrms indexed
by i . Each ﬁrm is risk-neutral and governed by managers
whose incentives are fully aligned with shareholders and
who discount cash ﬂows at the risk-free rate r. Every ﬁrm
produces homogeneous output, which can be structured
into many different products. We assume that the produc-
tive capacity is split equally across all products. For exam-
ple, one could think of the ﬁrm producing the same kind
of product but marketing it to different market niches or
tastes by exploiting differentiation, by altering its branding,
appearance, etc. The products are thus ex ante identical.
However, each product follows a life cycle pattern, which
is the key feature of the model. Hence, the products will
be different ex post as they will be in a different stage of
their life cycle.
Each ﬁrm uses a decreasing return-to-scale technology
to produce output and is subject to ﬁrm-wide productivity
shock. Given the capital stock K i and the proﬁtability shock
Z i , ﬁrm i generates output, equal to ZK θ, shared equally
across all products. The proﬁtability shock Z i follows an
AR(1) process in logs,
log (Z ′
i ) = ρlog (Z i ) + σε ′
i , ε ′
i ∼ N(0 , 1) , (2)
where a prime indicates the subsequent period. Given
gross investment I i , the next-period physical capital stock
evolves according to
K ′
i = I i + (1 − δ) K i , (3)
with capital depreciation rate δ ∈ [0 , 1] . Depreciation ex-
penses are tax deductible. When ﬁrm i adjusts its capital
stock, it incurs convex capital adjustment costs deﬁned as
/Psi1(K i , K ′
i ) = ψ
[
K ′
i − (1 − δ) K i
]2
/ 2 K i . (4)
3.2. Product dynamics
In the model, each product follows a life-cycle pattern
and can be in one of four states: ‘introduction,’ ‘new,’ ‘old,’
and ‘exit.’ New and old products are different, as each old
product provides only 100 × ξ% of the revenue of a new
product, consistent with product life cycle. A product that
exits contributes nothing to the ﬁrm’s revenue. The graph-
ical illustration of an individual product’s life cycle is pre-
sented in Fig. 5 .
A product that is introduced immediately becomes new,
which corresponds to t n in Fig. 5 . Every period, a new
product can transition to being an old product with proba-
bility p n → o , which happens at time t o in Fig. 5 , or remains
new with probability p n → n ≡ 1 − p n → o . Similarly, every pe-
riod an old product can either remain old with probability
q o→ o , or exits with probability q o→ e ≡ 1 − q o→ o , which hap-
pens at time t e in Fig. 5 . A product that exits remains in
that state forever. The product life cycle of a single prod-
uct can thus be characterized by a transition matrix
intr t new t old t exit t
intr t+1
new t+1
old t+1
exit t+1
⎡
⎢
⎣
0 0 0 0
1 p n → n 0 0
0 p n → o q o→ o 0
0 0 q o→ e 1
⎤
⎥
⎦
(5)
At the beginning of each period, the ﬁrm owns P n
i
new products and P o
i old products, and decides whether
to introduce /Delta1n
i new products. It does so by trading off
the beneﬁts of a younger product portfolio, that is higher
current revenue and higher durability of revenue, versus
product introduction costs equal to ηK i · /Delta1n
i . The prod-
uct introduction costs capture the fact that introducing
new products is costly, as it requires the ﬁrm to conduct
market research, repurpose its production technology, or
hire workers to market the products. 13 Thus, the stock of
new products P n can change in two ways: the ﬁrm can in-
troduce more products or existing new products can be-
come old. The stock of old products P o
i changes due to the
ageing of new products and because old products can exit.
As such, the transition probability for the ﬁrm’s end-of-
period product portfolio state /Phi1≡ (P n
i , P o
i ) (also called the
product portfolio structure) can be expressed by a tran-
sition matrix T /Phi1i , which contains the probability that the
ﬁrm’s products transition to the state /Phi1′ = (P ′
n , P ′
o ) condi-
tional on being in the state /Phi1= (P n
i , P o
i ) . The construction
of the product portfolio transition matrix T /Phi1i is described
in detail in the Internet Appendix. 14
Given the structure of product dynamics in the model,
we can compute the share of old products in the ﬁrm’s
product portfolio as:
φ ≡ φ(/Delta1n
i , /Phi1i ) =
P o
i
P n
i + /Delta1n
i + P n
i
, (6)
which is tightly linked to the empirical proxy for prod-
uct portfolio age developed in Section 2 . Furthermore, the
transition matrix allows to infer the expected lifetime of
each product,
m ( intr ., exit ) =
1
1 − p n → n
+
1
1 − q o→ o
. (7)
Formally, Eq. (7) is the expected hitting time of state
‘exit’ of a product starting at state ‘introduction’ and it im-
plies that each product is expected to remain ‘new’ for
1 / (1 − p n → n ) periods and ‘old’ for 1 / (1 − q o→ o ) periods.
Given that we can observe the left-hand side of Eq. (7) in
the data, and given the break point assumption used to
create the measure of product portfolio age, the model can
be tightly linked to the data using this deﬁnition of prod-
uct portfolio age.
13 The chosen functional form of the product introduction cost is con-
sistent with the evidence in Table 4 which shows that there is indeed a
discrete change in ﬁrms’ cash ﬂows when introducing new products.
14 In the baseline model, the ﬁrm does not have the possibility to re-
move a product from its portfolio, meaning that product exit is purely
stochastic. This modeling choice captures the notion of product exit being
driven by exogenous customer demand forces: the ﬁrm would withdraw
the product when it contributes nothing to revenue. In Section 5 , we relax
this assumption by extending the model to allow for endogenous product
exit.
943

===== PAGE 13 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
Fig. 5. Graphical representation of each product’s evolution in the model.
3.3. The representative consumer’s problem
The representative consumer is endowed with Dixit-
Stiglitz preferences and thus has a preference for vari-
ety, captured by parameter 0 < γ < 1 . This parameter is
directly related to the elasticity of substitution between
product varieties, equal to 1 / (1 − γ ) . We assume that
the representative consumer prefers new products to old,
which is captured by the parameter 0 ≤ ξ ≤ 1 . This im-
plies that product prices and quantities will vary along the
product life cycle. In particular, each product, indexed by
j, is sold by ﬁrm i at price p ζ
ij and in quantity q ζ
ij , with
ζ ∈ { n, o} , depending on the stage of product’s j life cy-
cle. As a consequence, old products contribute less to the
ﬁrm’s revenue than new ones, in line with empirical ev-
idence of Argente et al. (2021b) . We assume that the to-
tal number of products in the economy is given by P n and
P o for new and old products, respectively. This formulation
implies that representative consumer’s utility function is:
U 0 =
(
∫
i ∈F
P n
i ∑
j=1
(
q n
ij
)γ
d i + ξ
∫
i ∈F
P o
i ∑
j=1
(
q o
ij
)γ
d i
) 1
γ
. (8)
The representative consumer’s problem is to maximize
its utility in Eq. (8) subject to a budget constraint (we nor-
malize the total endowment to 1):
∫
i ∈F
P n
i ∑
j=1
p n
ij q n
ij d i +
∫
i ∈F
P o
i ∑
j=1
p o
ij q o
ij d i = 1 . (9)
We can solve the representative consumer’s optimiza-
tion problem to obtain the optimal prices:
p n
ij =
γ
ϕ
(
q n
ij
)γ−1
and p o
ij = ξ γ
ϕ
(
q o
ij
)γ−1
, (10)
where ϕ is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the
budget constraint. The quantities q n
ij and q o
ij are obtained
by using the assumption that the ﬁrm produces homoge-
neous output, equally split across all of its products:
q n
ij =
(
Z i K θ
i
P n
i + P o
i
)1
γ
and q o
ij =
(
Z i K θ
i
P n
i + P o
i
)1
γ
. (11)
The product-speciﬁc revenue is thus equal to
p n
ij q n
ij =
γ
ϕ
Z i K θ
i
P n
i + P o
i
and p o
ij q o
ij = ξ γ
ϕ
Z i K θ
i
P n
i + P o
i
. (12)
for a new and an old product, respectively.
3.4. Financing frictions
Each ﬁrm’s ﬁnancing choices consist of internal funds
(cash and current proﬁts), risk-free debt, and costly exter-
nal equity. Since in the model it is never optimal to hold
both debt and cash at the same time, we deﬁne the stock
of net debt D i as the difference between the stock of debt
and the stock of cash.
Debt takes the form of a riskless perpetual bond incur-
ring taxable interest at a rate r(1 − τ) . As in Hennessy and
Whited (2005) and DeAngelo et al. (2011) , the stock of
debt is subject to a collateral constraint proportional to the
depreciated value of capital
D i ≤ ω(1 − δ) K i , (13)
where ω is the collateral constraint parameter such that
ω ∈ [0 , 1] . Alternatively, ﬁrms may choose to hoard liquid
assets to save on the costs of external equity issuance or to
avoid depleting their debt capacity. However, the interest
earned on the cash balance is equal to r(1 − τ) , meaning
that liquid assets earn a lower rate of return than the risk-
free rate.
The cost of raising external equity is modeled in
reduced form, similar to Hennessy and Whited (2005,
2007)
/Lambda1(E i (·)) = λE i (·) 1 { E i (·) < 0 } , (14)
944

===== PAGE 14 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
where E i is ﬁrm’s i cash ﬂow, implying that ﬁrm i has to
bear a proportional equity ﬁnancing cost λ if it issues ex-
ternal equity.
3.5. The ﬁrm’s cash ﬂow
Using the derived product-speciﬁc revenue in Eq. (12) ,
the ﬁrm’s i gross proﬁts are:
P n
i ∑
j=1
p n
ij q n
ij +
P o
i ∑
j=1
p o
ij q o
ij =
γ
ϕ
P n
i + ξ P o
i
P n
i + P o
i
Z i K θ
i
=
γ
ϕ
[ (1 − φi ) + ξφ i ] Z i K θ
i
=
γ
ϕ
[1 − (1 − ξ) φi ] Z i K θ
i . (15)
Note that the ﬁrm’s operating revenue in Eq. (15) consists
of the ﬁrm’s share of old products, which evolves as
φ′
i ≡ φ′
i (/Delta1n
i , /Delta1o
i , /Phi1i ) =
P o′
i
P n ′
i + P o′
i
. (16)
The share of old products in Eq. (16) is thus tightly linked
to the empirical measure of product portfolio age devel-
oped in Section 2 . The ﬁrm’s i cash ﬂow E i is a function of
(/Delta1n
i , K i , K ′
i , D i , D ′
i , /Phi1i , Z i ) , consists of operating, investment,
and ﬁnancing cash ﬂow
E i (·) = (1 − τ)
[ γ
ϕ
Z i K θ
i (1 − φi (1 − ξ)) − ηK i /Delta1n
i
]
/bracehtipupleft /bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft /bracehtipupright
after −tax operating proﬁt
+ τδ × K i /bracehtipupleft /bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft /bracehtipupright
depreciation
tax credit
− K ′
i + (1 − δ) K i /bracehtipupleft /bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft /bracehtipupright
investment
− ψ
[
K ′
i − (1 − δ) K i
]2
/ 2 K i
/bracehtipupleft /bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft /bracehtipupright
capital
adjustment cost
+ D ′
i −[1 + r(1 − τ)] D i /bracehtipupleft /bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft /bracehtipupright
net debt issuance
less interest expense
. (17)
This formulation implies that ﬁrm i issues external eq-
uity if its cash ﬂow is negative or pays out a dividend oth-
erwise.
3.6. Entry
To close the model, we must formulate the entrants’
problem. We assume that there is a mass of potential en-
trants facing an endogenous entry cost. We specify the en-
try cost to be equal to the value of the entering ﬁrm upon
entry, which depends on the entrant’s initial capital (set to
the lower bound value), net debt (set to zero) and prod-
uct portfolio structure (set to a single new product). We
look for stationary equilibria in which the entry condition
is binding, i.e. in which there is no entry. This assumption,
together with the fact that the total number of new and
old products in the economy is ﬁxed, allows to pin down
the Lagrange multiplier ϕ in equilibrium when other pa-
rameters change. 15
15 Consequently, when taking the model to the data we set ϕ = 1 . This
is a normalizing assumption, which allows us to study the effects on in-
dustry structure in counterfactual experiments.
3.7. Recursive formulation and model solution
Each ﬁrm’s problem is to maximize the present value of
its future cash ﬂows by choosing the investment, debt and
product policies, subject to the external equity issuance
cost /Lambda1(·) and the collateral constraint. Since all of our
ﬁrms are symmetric, we can drop the subscript i and the
corresponding Bellman equation is:
V (K, D, /Phi1, Z| ϕ) = max
/Delta1n ,K ′ ,D ′ { E(·) + /Lambda1(E(·))
+ βE
[
V (K ′ , D ′ , /Phi1′ , Z ′ | ϕ)
]}
,
s.t. D ≤ ω(1 − δ) K. (18)
The model is solved numerically using value function
iteration. The numerical algorithm takes as given the en-
try cost and solves for the corresponding ϕ that makes the
entry condition binding. Once obtained, ϕ together with
Eq. (9) determine the mass of ﬁrms F, which is informa-
tive about the industry structure.
3.8. Optimal policies and industry equilibrium implications
In this section, we analyze the optimal product, invest-
ment and ﬁnancing policies of a single ﬁrm. We derive the
ﬁrst-order conditions and investigate how product portfo-
lio decisions interact with the ﬁrm’s choice of investment
and debt. We focus on highlighting insights that are in-
herently different from those stemming from standard dy-
namic models of the ﬁrm. Finally, we outline the main im-
plications of the industry equilibrium effects.
3.8.1. Product portfolio adjustments
To understand how ﬁrms optimally adjust their product
portfolios, we ﬁrst derive the approximate ﬁrst-order con-
dition for product introduction /Delta1n , assuming for simplicity
that the ﬁrm does not issue equity:
(1 − τ) ηK
/bracehtipupleft /bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft /bracehtipupright
product
introduction
cost
≈− (1 − τ)
γ
ϕ
ZK θ (1 − ξ)
/Delta1(φ)
/Delta1(/Delta1n )
/bracehtipupleft /bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft /bracehtipupright
proﬁtincrease
today
+ βE
[
/Delta1(V (K ′ , D ′ , /Phi1′ (/Delta1n ) , Z ′ ))
/Delta1(/Delta1n )
]
/bracehtipupleft /bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft /bracehtipupright
proﬁtincrease
tomorrow
.
(19)
Firms will introduce new products as long as the
marginal cost on the left-hand side of Eq. (19) is smaller
than the marginal beneﬁt of introducing a new product on
the right-hand side of Eq. (19) . 16 The marginal cost consists
of the after-tax product introduction cost. The marginal
beneﬁt has two parts: the contemporaneous effect on prof-
its today (which is positive, as the effect of /Delta1n on φ is
negative) and the effect on future proﬁts. The ﬁrst effect
depends on the old product-speciﬁc revenue discount ξ
and on the elasticity of substitution γ. Furthermore, the
marginal beneﬁt also changes with product portfolio struc-
ture /Phi1and the proﬁtability shock Z. For example, when
16 In Eq. (19) , /Delta1(·) indicates the discrete derivative, deﬁned as
/Delta1(f(n )) = f(n + 1) − f(n ) .
945

===== PAGE 15 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
the proﬁtability shock is more persistent, the ﬁrm has
more incentives to introduce new products to reap the
beneﬁts associated with the proﬁtability shock whose ef-
fects last longer. Finally, the marginal beneﬁt of a new
product today also contains the expected marginal change
in ﬁrm value, because today’s product portfolio adjustment
affects its potential future evolution. Thus, Eq. (19) shows
that investment and debt decisions indirectly affect prod-
uct portfolio structure. 17
3.8.2. Investment
Eq. (19) suggests that the ﬁrm’s product portfolio
adjustment is intertwined with other corporate policies
through the effect on the expected marginal change in ﬁrm
value. To see the exact link between investment and prod-
uct decisions, we derive the investment Euler equation,
which sets the discounted expected return on capital in-
vestment equal to the value of a dollar payout today: 18
1 = βE
[
(1 + /Lambda1′ (E(·))
(1 + /Lambda1(E(·))
(
MB i
MC i
+
MB /Phi1
i (K ′ , Z ′ , /Delta1n ′ , /Phi1′ )
MC i
)]
,
(20)
where
MB /Phi1
i (K ′ , Z ′ , /Delta1′
P , /Phi1′ )
= −θ(1 − τ)
γ
ϕ
(1 − ξ)
(φ′ K ′ θ−1 Z ′ − η/Delta1n ′ )
. (21)
Eq. (20) shows that the return on capital investment
consists of two parts. The ﬁrst part, common to e.g. the
neoclassical investment model, is the ratio of the marginal
beneﬁt of investment MB , which comprises the marginal
increase in output, the value of additional depreciated
capital, and lower adjustment costs in the future, to the
marginal cost MC, equal to a dollar spent on investment
and the corresponding investment adjustment costs. The
second part is the ratio of the marginal beneﬁt of invest-
ment due to the product portfolio structure, captured by
MB /Phi1(·) , to the marginal cost.
Product and investment policies are related, because
older product portfolio negatively affects the ﬁrm’s rev-
enue, resulting in a lower marginal beneﬁt of investment.
Introducing more new products increases the marginal
beneﬁt of investment, because lower revenue discount as-
sociated with younger product portfolios and higher dura-
bility of revenue increase the ﬁrm’s incentives to invest in
physical capital. Intuitively, the ﬁrm can now beneﬁt from
its physical capital for a longer period of time. This sug-
gests that product introductions and capital investment act
as complements. Finally, a direct computation shows that
∂ MB /Phi1
i (·) /∂ φ′ < 0 , documenting that the model is able to
reconcile the stylized fact that product portfolio age and
17 Eq. (19) shows that the next period stock of new products P ′
n and old
products P ′
o both depend on how many new products were introduced
and withdrawn in the current period, as it affects the transition matrix
T /Phi1. Thus, ∂ V ′ /∂ /Delta1n and ∂ V ′ /∂ /Delta1o are non-trivial quantities depending on
∂ /Phi1′ /∂ /Delta1n and ∂ /Phi1′ /∂ /Delta1o .
18 Details of the computation are provided in the Internet Appendix.
investment are negatively related. Overall, the Euler equa-
tion shows that incentive to invest in physical capital can
vary with the ﬁrm’s product portfolio structure.
3.8.3. Net debt
To examine how ﬁnancing and product decisions are
interrelated, we combine the ﬁrst-order condition for the
debt choice D ′ and the corresponding envelope condition,
which yields
1 = βE
[
1 + /Lambda1′ (E(·))
1 + /Lambda1(E(·))
(
1 + r(1 − τ) + μ′ )]
, (22)
where μ is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the
collateral constraint. The right-hand side of Eq. (22) is the
expected discounted value of debt, which is equal to the
interest payments less the tax shield and the shadow value
of relaxing the constraint on issuing debt. The Lagrange
multiplier μ indicates that debt is more valuable when
the collateral constraint is expected to bind, highlighting
that the ﬁrm may have incentives to preserve its debt ca-
pacity today to avoid reaching the collateral constraint to-
morrow and having to issue costly external equity. This
result, standard in dynamic investment models such as
e.g. Gamba and Triantis (2008) or DeAngelo et al. (2011) ,
shows that debt capacity has value as it grants the ﬁrm
more ﬁnancial ﬂexibility. One implication of this notion is
the fact that ﬁnancial, investment and product policies will
be intertwined: if the ﬁrm is more likely to introduce new
products tomorrow, it will follow a conservative debt pol-
icy today.
Eq. (22) suggests that the model can reconcile the styl-
ized facts: absent product portfolio adjustment opportuni-
ties, the ﬁrm will preserve its debt capacity, resulting in a
negative relation between product portfolio age and lever-
age. Thus, even though product choice does not directly af-
fect the ﬁrm’s debt policy, it has an indirect effect, because
it affects the ﬁrm value as well as the probability of incur-
ring the equity issuance cost. 19
3.8.4. Industry equilibrium
The industry equilibrium setup affects corporate poli-
cies and industry structure in three ways. First, the prefer-
ence for variety parameter γ directly inﬂuences cash ﬂows
and, as such, translates into investment and ﬁnancing de-
cisions, as indicated by Eq. (17) . Second, the entry cost is
closely related to ﬁrm value and thus the industry equilib-
rium effects following changes in entry cost will feed back
into the ﬁrm-level policies. This happens because when
a change in the underlying product or ﬁrm characteris-
tic affects valuation, the Lagrange multiplier ϕ adjusts so
that the entry cost can be matched. This mechanism re-
sults in a moderating effect of industry equilibrium on in-
dividual ﬁrm policies, similarly to, e.g., Geelen et al. (2022) .
19 While the model puts emphasis on the fact that product introduction
decisions affect ﬁrms’ ﬁnancing decisions only through the ’quantitative
rationing’ effects of the collateral constraint, the negative association be-
tween leverage and product portfolio age is also consistent with ﬁrms
issuing debt for tax reasons. Indeed, since younger product portfolios are
associated with higher proﬁts, their incentives to shield these proﬁts from
taxation are also higher and thus they will issue more debt. This channel
is also present in the model.
946

===== PAGE 16 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
Third, the industry structure, captured by ﬁrm granularity
F, adapts as well, so that the budget constraint in Eq. (9) is
satisﬁed. In particular, F varies following i. changes in
model parameters, ii. changes in corporate policies and iii.
the adjustment of the Lagrange multiplier ϕ. Finally, we
use the ﬁrm granularity measure F as a natural proxy for
industry concentration, 1 / F.
4. Estimation and identiﬁcation
We structurally estimate the industry equilibrium
model to examine the quantitative implications of product
decisions on corporate policies. In this section, we describe
the estimation procedure, discuss the identiﬁcation of the
structural parameters, present the baseline results and the
cross-sectional implications of the model.
4.1. Estimation
While the majority of the structural parameters of
the model are estimated using simulated method of mo-
ments (SMM), several parameters are estimated separately.
Throughout the paper, we set the tax rate τ to 20% as an
approximation of the corporate tax rate relative to personal
taxes. The risk-free interest rate r is 1.21%, which is close
to the average 3 month T-bill rate over the sample period.
We also directly estimate the proportional external equity
ﬁnancing cost by regressing issuance proceeds on under-
writing fees using a matched sample from SDC Platinum,
which implies a value of 0.0259. 20 The ‘preference for va-
riety’ parameter γ is set to 0.8457 based on Redding and
Weinstein (2019) , who estimate the elasticity of substitu-
tion between varieties using the Nielsen Homescan data.
Finally, we also estimate separately the probability of a
‘new’ product remaining ‘new’ p n → n and the probability of
an ‘old’ product exiting p o→ e . These probabilities can be
inferred directly using the expected lifetime of a product
implied by the model, shown in Eq. (7) , and the deﬁnition
of the empirical proxy. In particular, in our data a prod-
uct is considered ‘old’ if it exceeds half of its lifetime. This
means that each product spends half of its lifespan being
‘new’ and the other half being ‘old.’ In terms of the model,
this implies that
m ( intr ., exit ) = 1
2
1
1 − p n → n
+ 1
2
1
1 − q o→ o
, 1
1 − p n → n
= 1
1 − q o→ o
. (23)
In the data, the average lifespan of a product (weighted by
revenue) is 15.95 quarters. This implies that p n → n = 0 . 8746
and q o→ e = 1 − q o→ o = 0 . 1254 . 21
We estimate the remaining 9 parameters
(θ, σ, ρ, δ, ψ, ω, η, ξ) using SMM, where θ is the pro-
duction function curvature, σ is the standard deviation
and ρ the autocorrelation of the proﬁtability process; δ
20 By doing so, we only control for direct costs of equity issuance, as in
e.g. Warusawitharana and Whited (2016) or Michaels et al. (2018) .
21 We re-estimate the product transition probability every time we es-
timate the model on a new subsample, as the average product lifes-
pan changes as well. Table C.4 in the Internet Appendix shows how
the estimated product transition probabilities change across different
subsamples.
is the physical capital depreciation rate; ψ is the capital
adjustment cost parameter; ω is the parameter governing
the collateral constraint; η is the product introduction
cost and ξ is the old product-speciﬁc revenue discount.
To do so, we ﬁrst solve the model numerically, given the
parameters, and generate simulated data from the model.
Then, we compute a set of moments of interest using both
the simulated and actual data. The SMM estimation proce-
dure determines the parameter values that minimize the
weighted distance between the model-implied moments
and their empirical counterparts. Appendix C provides
further details on the estimation procedure.
4.2. Identiﬁcation
Before proceeding with estimation, we discuss the iden-
tiﬁcation of the structural parameters. SMM estimators are
identiﬁed when the selected empirical moments equal the
simulated moments if and only if the structural parame-
ters are at their true value. A suﬃcient condition for this
is a one-to-one mapping between a subset of structural pa-
rameters and the selected moments, that is the moments
have to vary when the structural parameters vary. Because
the ﬁrm’s product, investment, ﬁnancing, and payout de-
cisions are intertwined, all of the moments are to some
extent sensitive to all the parameters. However, some re-
lationships are strongly monotonic in the underlying pa-
rameters and as such more informative of the relationship,
thus useful for identifying the corresponding parameter.
For example, the variance of operating proﬁts is informa-
tive of σ while ρ is identiﬁed from the serial correlation of
operating proﬁts, which is estimated using the technique
of Han and Phillips (2010) .
We select 12 moments related to ﬁrms’ operating prof-
its, investment, net leverage and product portfolio charac-
teristics. We do not choose the moments arbitrarily but
rather include a wide selection of moments to understand
which features of the data the model can and cannot ex-
plain. Therefore, we examine all means, variances and se-
rial correlations of all main variables of interest that can be
computed in the model. Notably, in the estimation proce-
dure we refrain from using moments related to the size of
the product portfolio (i.e. the number of products), given
that the model is unlikely to match the data on this mar-
gin, as ﬁrms introduce products for variety of reasons that
are not captured by this model (see e.g. Hottman et al.,
2016 ). Instead, we focus on product portfolio age which, as
we argue, helps identify parameters related to the product
characteristics.
The remaining parameters are identiﬁed as follows. The
physical capital depreciation rate δ is strongly linked to the
mean of investment. The capital adjustment cost parame-
ter ψ is identiﬁed by the variance and autocorrelation of
investment, as higher adjustment costs result in the ﬁrm
smoothing investment. The collateral constraint parameter
ω is identiﬁed by the mean of net leverage. The product
introduction cost η is identiﬁed by the variance and auto-
correlation of old product share, as higher cost results in
more lumpy product introduction policy. The old product-
speciﬁc discount ξ, on the other hand, is tightly linked to
the mean of old product share, as it determines the trade
947

===== PAGE 17 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
Table 5
Structural estimates and model-implied moments. The table reports the structural estimates and the model-
implied moments. The industry equilibrium model is estimated using the simulated method of moments, which
chooses model parameters by minimizing the distance between the moments from a simulated panel of ﬁrms
and their data counterparts. Panel A reports the simulated and actual moments and the t -statistics for the differ-
ences between the corresponding moments. Panel B reports the estimated parameters and their standard errors,
clustered at the ﬁrm-level. θ is the production function curvature; σ is the standard deviation of the proﬁtability
shock; ρ is the persistence of the proﬁtability process; δ is the capital depreciation rate; ψ is the investment
adjustment cost; ω is the parameter governing the collateral constraint; η is the product introduction cost; ξ is
the old product-speciﬁc revenue discount. Appendix C provides the details about the estimation procedure.
Panel A : Moments
Simulated Actual t-stat
Mean operating proﬁts 0.0400 0.0401 0.075
Variance of operating proﬁts 0.0009 0.0009 0.466
Serial correlation of operating proﬁts 0.2771 0.2093 -0.605
Mean investment 0.0211 0.0212 0.022
Variance of investment 0.0003 0.0006 2.642
Serial correlation of investment 0.1876 0.1742 -0.183
Mean net leverage 0.1824 0.1716 -0.409
Variance of net leverage 0.0058 0.0093 2.903
Serial correlation of net leverage 0.5784 0.7848 4.425
Mean old product share 0.4295 0.4444 1.463
Variance of old product share 0.0796 0.0946 2.978
Serial correlation of old product share 0.4010 0.4392 0.425
Panel B : Parameters
Parameter θ σ ρ δ ψ ω η ξ
Estimate 0.6317 0.3052 0.3958 0.0838 0.6575 0.3024 0.0068 0.5420
Std. error (0.0346) (0.0352) (0.0646) (0.0052) (0.3135) (0.0239) (0.0010) (0.0574)
off the ﬁrm faces when deciding on product introductions
today.
4.3. Estimation results
We summarize the results of the structural estimation
in Table 5 . Panel A contains simulated and actual moments.
Panel B reports the parameter estimates and their standard
errors.
The estimated model ﬁts the data fairly well on ﬁnan-
cial, real, and product dimensions, which is reﬂected by
the low values of t-statistics in Panel A testing the differ-
ence between the model- and data-implied moments. The
only exceptions are the variance and serial correlation of
net leverage and the variances of investment and product
portfolio age. Nevertheless, even if the difference between
simulated and actual moments is statistically signiﬁcant,
the economic difference is negligible.
Panel B documents that all estimated parameters are
economically meaningful and statistically signiﬁcant. It is
worth noting that the structural parameters have been es-
timated precisely, as their standard errors are low, indicat-
ing that the model is well identiﬁed. Additionally, in the
Internet Appendix we show that the model parameters are
locally identiﬁed by the underlying moments by comput-
ing the diagnostic measure of Andrews et al. (2017) .
The estimate of the product introduction cost η equals
0.68%, which implies that a typical sample ﬁrm behaves
as if it had to incur a cost of approximately $6.85m when
introducing a new product. While this cost appears sub-
stantial, it is required to square the fact that ﬁrms do not
continuously adjust product portfolios in the data, as the
distribution of product entry is fairly lumpy (see Fig. A.2
in the Internet Appendix). Moreover, the estimated cost
is ﬁxed and as such can be interpreted as if it com-
prised both the direct costs of introduction as well as indi-
rect ones (such as marketing). When analyzing the cross-
sectional predictions of the model, we show that the esti-
mate of the product introduction cost does vary with ﬁrm-
level variables such as product portfolio size and between-
ﬁrm product concentration as well as with product market
strategy characteristics, e.g. the durability of products.
The old product-speciﬁc discount ξ is estimated at
0.5420, meaning that ﬁrms act as if each old product in
their portfolio only contributed 54.2% of a new product’s
revenue. As such, the discount is fairly large, which is con-
sistent with the notion of product life cycle. In particular,
the fact that the estimate of ξ is strictly larger than 0 im-
plies that product life cycle effects are present and impor-
tant. On the other hand, the fact that it is not equal to 1
suggests ﬁrms still beneﬁt from old products, which is in-
deed the case as their proﬁtability does not drop to 0, as
per Fig. 2 . 22
The structural estimates of the remaining parameters
are in range of those in extant studies of ﬁrms’ ﬁnanc-
22 Products in the model do not differ with regard to their expected life-
time, whereas this is the case in the data. The effective revenue of old but
long-lasting products could be higher than that of old but short-lasting
products. In Panel A of Table 7 we show that this is indeed the case as
the estimate of ξ is indeed higher in the sample of ﬁrms with long-lived
products.
948

===== PAGE 18 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
Table 6
Structural estimates and model-implied moments: The ‘product-less’ benchmark model. The table reports the struc-
tural estimates and the model-implied moments. The industry equilibrium model is estimated using the simulated
method of moments, which chooses model parameters by minimizing the distance between the moments from a
simulated panel of ﬁrms and their data counterparts. Panel A reports the simulated and actual moments and the t -
statistics for the differences between the corresponding moments. Panel B reports the estimated parameters and their
standard errors, clustered at the ﬁrm-level. θ is the production function curvature; σ is the standard deviation of the
proﬁtability shock; ρ is the persistence of the proﬁtability process; δ is the capital depreciation rate; ψ is the invest-
ment adjustment cost; ω is the parameter governing the collateral constraint. Appendix C provides the details about
the estimation procedure.
Panel A : Moments
Simulated Actual t-stat
Mean operating proﬁts 0.0399 0.0401 0.078
Variance of operating proﬁts 0.0002 0.0009 4.011
Serial correlation of operating proﬁts 0.1396 0.2093 0.621
Mean investment 0.0150 0.0212 4.484
Variance of investment 0.00004 0.0006 5.543
Serial correlation of investment 0.0114 0.1742 2.214
Mean net leverage 0.2154 0.1716 -1.668
Variance of net leverage 0.00002 0.0093 7.727
Serial correlation of net leverage 0.6592 0.7848 2.692
Panel B : Parameters
Parameter θ σ ρ δ ψ ω
Estimate 0.4746 0.1957 0.2486 0.0599 0.2352 0.2398
Std. error (0.0261) (0.0314) (0.1008) (0.0040) (0.0412) (0.0290)
ing and investment policy. For example, the standard de-
viation of the proﬁtability shock σ and the collateral con-
straint parameter ω that determines the ﬁrm’s debt capac-
ity are close to the ones obtained in Nikolov et al. (2018) .
The persistence of the proﬁtability process ρ and the con-
vex investment adjustment cost ψ are similar to the ones
reported in Warusawitharana and Whited (2016) for the
food manufacturing industry, which comprise the major-
ity of the sample ﬁrms. Furthermore, to ensure robustness
of our results, in the Internet Appendix we estimate our
model using an alternative measure, which does not re-
quire that each product needs to have entered or exited
our sample during the sample period. Table C.2 documents
that the parameter estimates are quantitatively similar to
those obtained by using the baseline measure of product
portfolio age.
To understand the implications of accounting for prod-
uct dynamics on the ability of the model to ﬁt the data,
we estimate a restricted version of the model in which we
turn off the product dimension. As such, the ﬁrm always
has a single new product and its product portfolio age is
equal to 0 at all times. Table 6 presents the estimation re-
sults of the restricted, ‘product-less’, model.
The evidence in Table 6 shows that that a model that
abstracts from the product level dimension largely fails
to match the empirical moments and results in less pre-
cise estimates. Indeed, the t-statistics of the differences be-
tween the model-implied and actual moments suggest that
the simpliﬁed model fails to match key moments in the
data, in particular means and variances of investment and
leverage. This may be due to the particular nature of the
ﬁrms that in our sample, which heavily rely on the prod-
uct retail channel. This aspect of the data is not captured
at all in the restricted model, resulting in a poor empir-
ical performance and a large difference in the estimated
parameters between the full- and restricted models.
4.4. Cross-sectional implications of the model
The results discussed until now show that the model
is able to jointly explain corporate investment, ﬁnancing
and product portfolio policies of the average sample ﬁrm.
In this section, we provide further empirical evidence of
the importance of the product life cycle channel by esti-
mating the model on subsamples of ﬁrms varying along
key characteristics. First, we investigate whether the esti-
mated model can reconcile differences between ﬁrms vary-
ing in their products’ sensitivity to product life cycle. This
analysis serves as a ‘sanity check’ as to whether the prod-
uct life cycle channel in the model corresponds to the one
observed in the data. Second, we investigate the cross-
sectional implications of other important product market
characteristics for the product life cycle channel. We fo-
cus on two dimensions of the data and split ﬁrms based
on aggregate, i.e. ﬁrm-level, as well as on product market
strategy characteristics. Third, we examine how industry-
wide effects interact with the product life cycle. We do so
by focusing on an early- vs. late sample split that high-
lights different aggregate characteristics and on booming
vs. declining ﬁrms, as measured by their product revenue
growth rate. This additional evidence provides further in-
sight as to how economic forces behind product life cycle
affect ﬁrms differing in dimensions not explicitly captured
by the model.
4.4.1. Sensitivity to product life cycle
To analyze whether the model reﬂects differences
across ﬁrms whose products vary in their sensitivity to
product life cycle, for each ﬁrm in the sample, we estimate
a product-level regression of the form
log ( rev ) jt = α + β ×log ( age ) jt + ηj + γc + ε jt , (24)
949

===== PAGE 19 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
Table 7
Structural estimates and model-implied moments: Sensitivity to product life cycle. The table reports the estimation results for subsamples of ﬁrms
more and less exposed to product life cycle, PLC, classiﬁed using the ﬁrm-speciﬁc regression coeﬃcient of product-level revenue on age, while
controlling for product-level and cohort-level ﬁxed effects. The industry equilibrium model is estimated using the simulated method of moments,
which chooses model parameters by minimizing the distance between the moments from a simulated panel of ﬁrms and their data counterparts.
Panel A reports the simulated and actual moments, while Panel B the estimated parameters and their standard errors, clustered at the ﬁrm-level.
θ is the production function curvature; σ is the standard deviation of the proﬁtability shock; ρ is the persistence of the proﬁtability process; δ
is the capital depreciation rate; ψ is the investment adjustment cost; ω is the parameter governing the collateral constraint; η is the product
introduction cost; ξ is the old product-speciﬁc revenue discount. Appendix C provides the details about the estimation procedure.
Panel A : Moments
Low sensitivity to PLC High sensitivity to PLC
Simulated Actual Simulated Actual
Mean operating proﬁts 0.0379 0.0428 0.0367 0.0376
Variance of operating proﬁts 0.0007 0.0008 0.0016 0.0011
Serial correlation of operating proﬁts 0.0804 0.1455 0.2392 0.3123
Mean investment 0.0190 0.0190 0.0236 0.0240
Variance of investment 0.0003 0.0003 0.0011 0.0012
Serial correlation of investment 0.1385 -0.0030 0.1428 0.3189
Mean net leverage 0.1992 0.1863 0.1378 0.1565
Variance of net leverage 0.0016 0.0073 0.0083 0.0112
Serial correlation of net leverage 0.5943 0.8056 0.5848 0.7673
Mean old product share 0.4310 0.4248 0.4341 0.4647
Variance of old product share 0.0899 0.0860 0.0875 0.1034
Serial correlation of old product share 0.3983 0.4420 0.4407 0.4367
Panel B : Parameters
Low sensitivity to product life cycle
Parameter θ σ ρ δ ψ ω η ξ
Estimate 0.6173 0.3016 0.1022 0.0756 0.5959 0.2959 0.0067 0.5898
Std. error (0.0321) (0.0419) (0.0133) (0.0029) (0.7534) (0.0457) (0.0075) (0.0397)
High sensitivity to product life cycle
Parameter θ σ ρ δ ψ ω η ξ
Estimate 0.7203 0.4677 0.3633 0.0925 0.3973 0.2701 0.0089 0.4909
Std. error (0.0067) (0.0418) (0.0184) (0.0076) (0.0816) (0.0559) (0.0035) (0.1360)
where j and t indicate the product and the quarter, and
c indicates the product’s corresponding cohort following
Deaton (1997) and Argente et al. (2021b) . We then split the
ﬁrms into two groups based on the estimates of β. Firms
with below-median (above-median) sensitivity of product
revenue to product age β should be less (more) exposed to
product life cycle effects, for example due to the fact that
their products are more (less) durable or are less (more)
susceptible to ageing.
Table 7 presents the estimation results for the two
subsamples. Panel A documents that the model-implied
and data moments are relatively close, implying that the
model captures well the policies of ﬁrms in both subsam-
ples. The results also suggest that ﬁrms supplying prod-
ucts less exposed to product life cycle have, on average,
higher proﬁtability and younger product portfolios. The
fact that these ﬁrms also adopt higher net leverage speaks
to the importance of the precautionary savings motive of
product life cycle, that should be less pronounced when
ﬁrms are less exposed to product life cycle. On the other
hand, ﬁrms with higher sensitivity to product life cycle
invest more on average, to extend the capacity and thus
revenue for their existing products before they become
obsolete.
The parameter estimates in Panel B indicate that prod-
ucts of ﬁrms with high product life cycle sensitivity lose
about 49% of revenue when they become old, as com-
pared to 59% for ﬁrms with low product life cycle sen-
sitivity. This shows that the model successfully captures
the intuition underlying the relationship between product
revenue and age, and as such the product-level informa-
tion is not lost when aggregating the product-level data to
the ﬁrm-level. Finally, ﬁrms with higher product life cy-
cle sensitivity are also more sensitive to ﬁrm-wide pro-
ductivity shocks, as the estimate of production function
curvature θ is higher in this subsample, as is the stan-
dard deviation of the proﬁtability shock. This ﬁnding sug-
gests that there can be some differences in the underly-
ing economic environment across the two subsamples of
ﬁrms, for example they may supply products in industries
that may be subject to different kinds of customer demand
dynamics.
4.4.2. Firm-level characteristics
We now turn to investigating the differences in esti-
mates along product dimensions not explicitly captured by
the model. We ﬁrst focus on aggregate characteristics, that
is those based on ﬁrm-level variables: the size of prod-
uct portfolio, between ﬁrm product concentration, and the
uniqueness of products supplied by ﬁrms. Table 8 contains
the parameter estimates for each subsample. To keep the
presentation of the results concise, the corresponding data-
and model-implied moments are relegated to the Internet
Appendix.
950

===== PAGE 20 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
Table 8
Cross-sectional evidence from sample splits: Firm-level characteristics. The table reports the estimation results for sub-
samples of ﬁrms varying according to speciﬁc ﬁrm characteristics. The industry equilibrium model is estimated on
each subsample using the simulated method of moments, which chooses model parameters by minimizing the distance
between the moments from a simulated panel of ﬁrms and their data counterparts. Panel A presents the results for
ﬁrms with small and large product portfolios. Panel B presents the results for ﬁrms with higher and lower between-
ﬁrm product concentration. Panel C presents the results for ﬁrms supplying more and less durable products. The table
reports the estimated structural parameters. Standard errors clustered at the ﬁrm-level are in parentheses. θ is the
production function curvature; σ is the standard deviation of the proﬁtability shock; ρ is the persistence of the prof-
itability process; δ is the capital depreciation rate; ψ is the investment adjustment cost; ω is the parameter governing
the collateral constraint; η is the product introduction cost; ξ is the old product-speciﬁc revenue discount. Appendix C
provides the details about the estimation procedure.
Panel A : Product portfolio size
θ σ ρ δ ψ ω η ξ
Smaller 0.7272 0.4745 0.1474 0.0992 0.2452 0.2392 0.0099 0.4364
(0.0037) (0.0191) (0.0140) (0.0068) (0.1013) (0.0208) (0.0012) (0.0717)
Larger 0.5042 0.2139 0.3411 0.0715 0.5351 0.2657 0.0053 0.6360
(0.0410) (0.0221) (0.0618) (0.0016) (0.1910) (0.0204) (0.0014) (0.0090)
Panel B : Between-ﬁrm product concentration
θ σ ρ δ ψ ω η ξ
Lower 0.7624 0.4499 0.5213 0.0871 0.7338 0.3168 0.0054 0.5044
(0.0509) (0.0329) (0.0717) (0.0060) (0.1615) (0.0013) (0.0006) (0.0641)
Higher 0.5532 0.2555 0.1354 0.0848 0.2716 0.2184 0.0054 0.6663
(0.0351) (0.0258) (0.0099) (0.0054) (0.0689) (0.0298) (0.0006) (0.0133)
Panel C : Product uniqueness
θ σ ρ δ ψ ω η ξ
Lower 0.6364 0.1089 0.1263 0.0715 0.5056 0.3497 0.0073 0.4322
(0.0168) (0.0296) (0.0337) (0.0021) (0.0727) (0.0355) (0.0008) (0.0919)
Higher 0.5617 0.3585 0.1295 0.0883 0.3480 0.2789 0.0078 0.5822
(0.0449) (0.0499) (0.0250) (0.0008) (0.1335) (0.0475) (0.0018) (0.0417)
Product portfolio size Panel A of Table 8 shows the
estimation results for ﬁrms with small and large product
portfolios, that is those with below- and above-median ef-
fective number of products, respectively. The parameter es-
timates indicate that ﬁrms with smaller product portfolios
face a higher cost of introducing new products and a more
pronounced old product-speciﬁc revenue discount. The re-
sults reinforce the notion that managing product portfo-
lios is even more important for ﬁrms with smaller product
portfolios, because they are more exposed to product life
cycle. Additionally, the fraction of capital that can be col-
lateralized ω is lower for ﬁrms with smaller product port-
folios than for ﬁrms with larger product portfolios. This
result has two explanations. First, since the correlation be-
tween product portfolio size and ﬁrm size is positive, a
part of the result is due to small ﬁrms having less capi-
tal (in terms of total assets) that can be pledged as col-
lateral, consistent with e.g. Nikolov et al. (2018) . Second,
the fact that the estimate of ω varies across the two sam-
ples suggests that the number of products also plays a
critical role, which can be consistent with ﬁrms behav-
ing as if their intangible assets (e.g. patents or trademarks)
can be pledged as collateral as well (see e.g. Mann, 2018;
Suh, 2019; Xu, 2021 ). The size of product portfolio could
also serve as a way for ﬁrms to diversify their revenues,
as ﬁrms with large product portfolios have lower variance
and higher autocorelation estimates for the proﬁtability
shock.
Between-ﬁrm product concentration Our model fea-
tures endogenous industry structure which interacts with
product life cycle and offers predictions on ﬁrm-level
concentration within the industry. The model does not,
however, explicitly take into account product concentra-
tion between ﬁrms. This dimension relates to the degree
of competitive pressure in the product market. Investigat-
ing this dimension of the data is important for two rea-
sons. First, it could affect the trade-offs determining prod-
uct life cycle, e.g. ﬁrms operating in more competitive or
less concentrated markets could be forced to introduce
more new products to be able to keep up with their com-
petitors or gain market share. Second, the empirical liter-
ature on product market competition has largely focused
on the between -ﬁrm dimension of the data. It is there-
fore instructive to examine how within -ﬁrm product mar-
ket forces, such as product life cycle, are related to cor-
porate policies. Importantly, the measure of concentration
adopted in this paper is better suited to characterize the
competitive environment faced by ﬁrms as it incorporates
complete information about the product markets they op-
erate in.
We explore how our model estimates vary with respect
to between ﬁrm product concentration. To do so, we ﬁrst
compute the revenue concentration in each product group
using HHI. Importantly, the concentration in each product
group relies on the entire available data comprising pub-
lic and private ﬁrms. Second, we compute the ﬁrm-level
951

===== PAGE 21 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
measure by weighting the product group concentrations
by the share of each product group’s sales in ﬁrms’ over-
all revenue. That is, this measure provides information of
whether a ﬁrm is exposed to more or less concentrated
product markets.
Panel B of Table 8 presents the estimates from two
subsamples differing in the degree of between-ﬁrm prod-
uct concentration. The results suggest that old products of
ﬁrms operating in more concentrated product markets pro-
vide about 66.3% of a new product’s revenue, compared
to 50.4% for ﬁrms subject to more competitive pressures.
Given that higher competition may result in products be-
coming obsolete quicker, that is ξ being lower, the re-
sults show that product life cycle is related to competitive
pressure, highlighting that both between- and within-ﬁrm
product market forces play an important role in shaping
corporate policies. Finally, ﬁrms operating in more concen-
trated product markets have higher operating proﬁts, con-
sistent with less intensive competition.
Importantly, our model-implied concentration measure,
1 / F, is consistent with the sample split. Indeed, in the
data, we observe that if ﬁrms operate in more concen-
trated product markets then, on average, they operate in a
more concentrated industry. As such, the two dimensions
of concentration reinforce each other and thus act as com-
plements.
Product uniqueness –c o s t of sales The last sample
split based on ﬁrm-level variables is related to product
uniqueness, typically proxied by the cost of sales (e.g.
Titman and Wessels, 1988 ), which captures all costs not di-
rectly related to goods sold, such as advertisement or cor-
porate expenses (Compustat item xsga ). This sample split
is important, as it speaks to the notion of selling more or
less specialized products and since the cost of sales con-
tains marketing expenses. As such, it should be related to
product life cycle, to the extent that ﬁrms try to inﬂuence
the lifetime of their products by engaging in, e.g., advertis-
ing. Finally, it measures a cost of selling products, which
should be closely related to the product introduction
cost η.
Panel C of Table 8 presents the results and indicates
that ﬁrms with higher cost of sales have higher product in-
troduction costs. Their products are, however, less exposed
to product life cycle: new products lose 42% of their rev-
enue when becoming old, as compared to 57% for ﬁrms
with lower cost of sales. Interestingly, higher cost of sales
do not translate to higher durability. In fact, ﬁrms with
higher cost of sales have lower average lifespan of their
products (85.98% vs. 88.78%), indicating that lower prod-
uct durability could be the underlying reason why ﬁrms
spend more on selling-related activities. It also highlights
that product durability is markedly different from prod-
uct uniqueness: more specialized ﬁrms are not necessarily
those that also supply more durable products.
4.4.3. Product market strategy characteristics
Product market strategy may determine the extent to
which product life cycle matters for ﬁrms. To this end, we
examine the effect of product market strategies that are
not directly accounted for by the model. Doing so is impor-
tant as it allows to examine how the estimates vary with
unmodeled product characteristics. More speciﬁcally, we
investigate three sample splits based on product durabil-
ity, product offering variety, and within ﬁrm product con-
centration. Table 9 contains the parameter estimates for
each subsample. We relegate the corresponding data- and
model-implied moments to the Internet Appendix.
Product durability In the model, each product is ex
ante homogeneous and is expected to last for the same
amount of time. However, in reality ﬁrms follow prod-
uct market strategies inﬂuencing the expected durabil-
ity of products, e.g. by expanding to more lasting prod-
uct categories or investing in customer retention. To
this end, we investigate how product durability interacts
with the product-level forces in the model. Panel A of
Table 9 presents the estimation results from two subsam-
ples split according to the expected durability of ﬁrms’
products, measured by the products’ average calendar age
at exit.
The estimates show that ﬁrms with lower product
durability face lower product introduction costs and are
more exposed to product life cycle, as their old products
provide only 47.4% of their revenue, as compared to 57.4%
for ﬁrms that introduce more durable products. Product
durability also has a large effect on the product transi-
tion probabilities, as the implied p n → n changes from 81.74%
to 90.55% across the two subsamples, which suggests that
products of ﬁrms with higher product durability are also
expected to last longer than those of ﬁrms with lower
product durability. This means that the net effect of having
product durability should be positive, which is conﬁrmed
in the data as ﬁrms supplying more durable products are
also more proﬁtable.
Product offering variety We now analyze how our es-
timates are affected by the degree of product offering va-
riety. Indeed, ﬁrms may choose to offer more vs. less vari-
ety of products within a product group. To do so, we focus
on the average number of brand-modules within a prod-
uct group. That is, ﬁrms exhibiting a larger product offer-
ing variety offer more brand-modules per product group.
As such, ﬁrms with more product variety are effectively
more diversiﬁed at the product level.
The results in Panel B of Table 9 document that ﬁrms
with larger product offering variety are more exposed to
product life cycle and face a higher cost of introducing a
new product. This latter effect is intuitive as offering a new
product that contributes to higher variety is costlier to cre-
ate. Moreover, these results are consistent with the notion
of product-level diversiﬁcation as the volatility estimate in
the subsample of ﬁrms with larger product offering variety
is about two times smaller.
Within-ﬁrm product concentration We further ex-
plore the notion of product concentration but now do so
at the ﬁrm-level. More speciﬁcally, we build a measure of
within-ﬁrm product concentration as the weighted average
concentration of product-speciﬁc sales within each product
group where the weights correspond to the share of the
product group in a ﬁrm’s overall product sales. As such,
this measure is informative of the degree of revenue con-
centration within the ﬁrm.
Panel C of Table 9 shows that ﬁrms supplying more
focused product portfolios are more exposed to product
952

===== PAGE 22 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
Table 9
Cross-sectional evidence from sample splits: Product market strategy characteristics. The table reports the estimation
results for subsamples of ﬁrms varying according to speciﬁc product characteristics. The industry equilibrium model is
estimated on each subsample using the simulated method of moments, which chooses model parameters by minimizing
the distance between the moments from a simulated panel of ﬁrms and their data counterparts. Panel A presents the
results for ﬁrms supplying more and less durable products. Panel B presents the results for with lower and higher
product offering variety. Panel C presents the results for ﬁrms with higher or lower within-ﬁrm product concentration.
The table reports the estimated structural parameters. Standard errors clustered at the ﬁrm-level are in parentheses.
θ is the production function curvature; σ is the standard deviation of the proﬁtability shock; ρ is the persistence of
the proﬁtability process; δ is the capital depreciation rate; ψ is the investment adjustment cost; ω is the parameter
governing the collateral constraint; η is the product introduction cost; ξ is the old product-speciﬁc revenue discount.
Appendix C provides the details about the estimation procedure.
Panel A : Product durability
θ σ ρ δ ψ ω η ξ
Lower 0.7307 0.1655 0.2048 0.0941 0.4841 0.2583 0.0064 0.4740
(0.0618) (0.0808) (0.0227) (0.0013) (0.1410) (0.0162) (0.0011) (0.0952)
Higher 0.6083 0.2660 0.4103 0.0768 0.4902 0.3093 0.0077 0.5740
(0.0232) (0.0342) (0.0318) (0.0054) (0.1952) (0.0430) (0.0013) (0.0916)
Panel B : Product offering variety
θ σ ρ δ ψ ω η ξ
Lower 0.6172 0.2925 0.1513 0.0860 0.2895 0.2482 0.0052 0.6383
(0.0367) (0.0642) (0.0150) (0.0055) (0.1108) (0.0012) (0.0004) (0.0520)
Higher 0.5185 0.1572 0.6610 0.0847 0.7244 0.2800 0.0081 0.5162
(0.0179) (0.0122) (0.0643) (0.0038) (0.1192) (0.0343) (0.0015) (0.0315)
Panel C : Within-ﬁrm product concentration
θ σ ρ δ ψ ω η ξ
Lower 0.5211 0.2775 0.1822 0.0705 0.7334 0.3803 0.0056 0.5908
(0.0020) (0.0185) (0.0083) (0.0028) (0.1039) (0.0333) (0.0004) (0.0220)
Higher 0.5557 0.4369 0.2628 0.0730 0.6160 0.2683 0.0082 0.5147
(0.0373) (0.0408) (0.0144) (0.0063) (0.0987) (0.0229) (0.0008) (0.0628)
life cycle and have higher product introduction costs than
ﬁrms following a more diversiﬁed product market strategy.
The results thus reinforce the notion that product market
strategy is used by ﬁrms to mitigate the effects of product
life cycle. Unlike product offering variety, however, within-
ﬁrm product concentration affects ﬁnancing to a larger ex-
tent, as the estimated fraction of capital that can be collat-
eralized ω varies more across the subsamples. This result
further indicates how product market strategy interacts
with external ﬁnancing. Finally, we observe that ﬁrms with
lower within-ﬁrm product concentration exhibit a lower
estimate for volatility. This evidence shows that ﬁrms can
use yet another product portfolio dimension for diversiﬁ-
cation purposes.
4.4.4. Industry-wide characteristics
We provide further empirical evidence on the role of
the product life cycle that relates to the aggregate state of
the industry by means of sample splits. More speciﬁcally,
we focus on the average product revenue growth rate and
and early and late sample period. 23
First, we consider ﬁrms that exhibit high vs. low prod-
uct revenue growth, a sample split that characterizes ﬁrms
in booming vs. declining industries. Estimation results in
Panel A of Table 10 reveal that the product introduction
23 For the early and late sample split, we use an alternative deﬁnition of
product portfolio age, described in the Internet Appendix, to better deal
with right- and left-censored product entry and exit.
cost remains very similar across the two subsamples, while
the old product-speciﬁc revenue discount is higher in the
subsample with higher product revenue growth rate. This
evidence is consistent with the mechanism in the model in
that ﬁrms growing faster also have younger product port-
folios.
Second, we consider an early vs. late subsample, by
splitting the data until 2010 and after 2010, respectively. In
our dataset, the early subsample is characterized by high
volatility of proﬁts while the volatility in the late sub-
sample is much lower. Estimation results in Panel B of
Table 10 show that despite the overall different level of
volatility across the two subsamples, the parameters char-
acterizing the product life cycle effect, namely the prod-
uct introduction cost, η, and the old product-speciﬁc rev-
enue discount, ξ, remain very close. Overall, the evidence
shows that the importance of the life cycle effect is pre-
served irrespective of the state of the economy, for exam-
ple whether ﬁrms are in high or low growth regime or
subject to high or low volatility of proﬁts.
5. Analysis, counterfactuals, and robustness
In this section, we study the implications of the
product-level economic forces for corporate policies. First,
we consider a number of counterfactuals to better under-
stand the quantitative importance of product market strat-
egy for corporate policies as well as industry structure.
Second, we extend the model to analyze the robustness of
the result with respect to the endogenous entry decision,
953

===== PAGE 23 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
Table 10
Evidence from sample splits: Industry-wide characteristics. The table reports the estimation results for subsamples of
ﬁrms varying according to speciﬁc industry-wide characteristics. The industry equilibrium model is estimated on each
subsample using the simulated method of moments, which chooses model parameters by minimizing the distance
between the moments from a simulated panel of ﬁrms and their data counterparts. Panel A presents results for high
vs. low product revenue growth ﬁrms. Panel B presents results for early and late sample periods with a cutoff year of
2010. The table reports the estimated structural parameters; standard errors clustered at ﬁrm-level are in parentheses.
θ is the production function curvature; σ is the standard deviation of the proﬁtability shock; ρ is the persistence of
the proﬁtability process; δ is the capital depreciation rate; ψ is the investment adjustment cost; ω is the parameter
governing the collateral constraint; η is the product introduction cost; ξ is the old product-speciﬁc revenue discount.
Appendix C provides the details about the estimation procedure.
Panel A : Product revenue growth rate
θ σ ρ δ ψ ω η ξ
Lower 0.6378 0.2836 0.3779 0.0830 0.6200 0.3279 0.0067 0.5082
(0.0256) (0.0303) (0.0252) (0.0033) (0.0547) (0.0299) (0.0011) (0.0552)
Higher 0.5853 0.3042 0.4208 0.0767 0.6536 0.2978 0.0061 0.5888
(0.0380) (0.0200) (0.0759) (0.0051) (0.1147) (0.0328) (0.0005) (0.0295)
Panel B : Time period
θ σ ρ δ ψ ω η ξ
Early 0.6368 0.4318 0.4067 0.0772 0.6391 0.2478 0.0060 0.5281
(0.0380) (0.0200) (0.0759) (0.0051) (0.1147) (0.0328) (0.0005) (0.0295)
Late 0.6094 0.3197 0.4030 0.0694 0.6743 0.2913 0.0062 0.5238
(0.0198) (0.0261) (0.0319) (0.0031) (0.2269) (0.0265) (0.0005) (0.0193)
the role of product cannibalization as well as the product
portfolio implications for debt and equity ﬁnancing.
5.1. Counterfactuals
We investigate the quantitative importance of product
dynamics for corporate policies by means of several coun-
terfactual exercises. First, we examine the impact of chang-
ing parameter values related to the product market dimen-
sion. We do so by varying the old product-speciﬁc dis-
count ξ and the probability of product exit q o→ e that gov-
ern the expected beneﬁt per product and expected product
lifetime. Second, we consider how product-level economic
forces affect corporate policies and ﬁrm value. We also
compare the results obtained from our industry equilib-
rium model to those implied by a ﬁrm-level model. Third,
we document how changing product characteristics affects
industry structure.
5.1.1. Comparative statics: product characteristics
We ﬁrst examine the effect of changing product-level
characteristics on corporate policies, in particular product
portfolio age. In Panels A and B of Fig. 6 we presents the
comparative statics of product portfolio age for the old
product-speciﬁc revenue discount ξ and for the probabil-
ity of old product exit q o→ e , which govern ﬁrms’ exposure
to the product life cycle channel and the durability of each
product, respectively. To construct these ﬁgures, we solve
the model in which the values of each parameter deviate
from its baseline estimated value, and then simulate the
model using the resulting optimal policies. 24
Higher values of ξ imply that each product provides
ﬁrms with more beneﬁts over the same expected life-
time. As such, ﬁrms have more incentives to introduce new
24 We present the graphs for product portfolio age, but discuss the im-
plications for investment and leverage as well. The respective graphs of
these policies are omitted for conciseness.
products and their product portfolio age declines, see Panel
A of Fig. 6 . This, in turn, results in ﬁrms substituting capi-
tal for product investment, as the latter becomes relatively
cheaper for the same level of total output. Thus, the av-
erage investment will decrease with ξ. Leverage, on the
other hand, increases in ξ, for three reasons. First, ﬁrms
ﬁnance product introductions by issuing debt, especially
when having an old product portfolio. Second, smaller old
product discount ξ results in higher revenues, which in-
centivizes ﬁrms to issue debt to beneﬁt from tax shields.
Finally, higher ξ means that ﬁrms are less exposed to the
product life cycle channel and thus having many old prod-
ucts is less risky, which means that ﬁrms value preserving
debt capacity less.
Panel B of Fig. 6 presents the effects of changing the
probability that an old product exits q o→ e on product port-
folio age. Essentially, this parameter determines the ex-
pected longevity of the ﬁrm’s products. When the proba-
bility is small, ﬁrms need to introduce less new products
to achieve the same level of product portfolio longevity, as
the existing products are expected to survive for a longer
period of time. This results in a higher average product
portfolio age. Product portfolio age declines with q o→ e due
to more frequent product introductions and more frequent
product exit. Increasing q o→ e will result in lower average
investment rate, for two reasons. First, ﬁrms will have to
introduce new products more often when they are less
durable and focus less on physical capital investment. Sec-
ond, when ﬁrms’ products become less durable, they re-
main proﬁtable for a shorter period of time and, as such,
ﬁrms will have lower incentives to invest in physical cap-
ital to beneﬁt from product revenue. Finally, ﬁrms will
adopt higher leverage when q o→ e increases as they ﬁnance
new product introductions by debt rather than by costly
external ﬁnancing as well as due to the fact that their rev-
enues are also higher and thus so are the tax beneﬁts of
debt.
954

===== PAGE 24 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
Fig. 6. Comparative statics of product-related parameters. The ﬁgures present comparative statics of product portfolio age related to the baseline model
as well as to the model extensions. Panel A shows the old product-speciﬁc discount ξ. Panel B presents the probability of old product exit q o→ e . Panel C
shows the effects of changing the product portfolio withdrawal cost parameter κ. Panel D analyzes product cannibalization by varying the cannibalization
parameter ϵ. Panel E illustrates the effects of changing the collateral constraint factor ω 1 . Panel F documents the effects of changing the equity cost factor
λ1 . Each point on the curve corresponds to the value of product portfolio age from a counterfactual experiment in which only the respective parameter
is changed in the industry equilibrium model. Each curve is a second-order polynomial interpolation of moments from a discrete set of counterfactual
experiments.
Table 11
Counterfactuals. The table reports the outcomes of counterfactual experiments stemming from two sets of alternative
model parametrizations. The ﬁrst set results from varying the old product-speciﬁc revenue discount ξ and the prod-
uct introduction cost η. Each cell represents the mid-point elasticity of a given moment with respect to changing the
parameter value by 1% around the baseline value. The columns indicated by ‘IE’ follow from the industry equilibrium
model, while those indicated by ‘Firm’ from the ﬁrm-level model, in which the industry equilibrium effects are not
accounted for. The second set examines the effect of the preference for variety parameter γ. Each cell represents the
mid-point elasticity between the model with no preference for variety and the baseline speciﬁcation. Firm value is mea-
sured using the average market-to-book ratio. Debt capacity is measured as the average difference between maximum
debt capacity ωK and current net debt, both as a fraction of capital.
ξ η γ
IE Firm IE Firm
Firm value 0.083% 0.379% -0.068% -0.129% 0.399%
Proﬁtability 0.084% 0.244% -0.016% -0.030% 0.130%
Investment -0.027% -0.131% -0.058% -0.028% 0.027%
Net leverage 2.519% 2.337% 1.526% 1.568% 0.379%
Debt capacity -3.866% -3.527% -2.321% -2.383% -0.626%
5.1.2. Firm value implications
We now investigate how quantitatively important prod-
uct market characteristics are in shaping ﬁrm value, cor-
porate policies as well as industry structure. In Table 11 ,
we consider two sets of counterfactual experiments. First,
we investigate the effects of changing the old product-
speciﬁc discount ξ and the cost of introducing new prod-
ucts η. Second, we analyze the quantitative importance of
the preference for variety parameter γ.
The elasticities of ξ in Table 11 imply that a 1% increase
in the old product-speciﬁc discount ξ results in the ﬁrm
value increasing by 0.083%. This happens because ﬁrms can
now proﬁt from their products for a longer period of time,
as upon becoming old, products lose a smaller share of
revenues. Importantly, the elasticity obtained using the es-
timates in the industry equilibrium model is lower than
that implied by the ﬁrm-level model, which does not take
into account the adjustment in industry structure. This
means that the equilibrium feedback effects also play an
important role in shaping corporate policies. The elastici-
ties of the moments due to changing ξ are also intuitive
and align with the mechanism described in Section 5.1.1 .
955

===== PAGE 25 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
First, the effect on proﬁtability mirrors that on ﬁrm value,
including the more muted effect in industry equilibrium:
the higher the old product-speciﬁc discount, the higher the
proﬁtability. Second, the negative effect of ξ on physical
investment is negative but quantitatively small. Finally, the
effect on net leverage is large and highlights that ﬁrms are
more proﬁtable and enjoy larger tax beneﬁts of debt when
ξ increases. It also underlies the inﬂuence of product life
cycle on the precautionary savings channel.
Table 11 also examines how the product introduction
cost η inﬂuences ﬁrm value and corporate policies. In par-
ticular, we ﬁnd that the elasticities of ﬁrm value and prof-
itability to η are negative: a 1% increase in the product in-
troduction cost results in ﬁrm value decreasing by 0.068%
in the industry equilibrium model and by 0.129% in the
ﬁrm-level model. The implications of changing η for in-
vestment and net leverage are also intuitive. The primary
channel through which they affect corporate policies is by
incentivizing new product introductions. Less new prod-
ucts imply lower investment in physical capital and higher
net leverage, as the introductions are more costly and as
more severe product life cycle effects now discourage the
ﬁrm to preserve its debt capacity. Overall, the results in
Table 11 suggest that the more severe the effects of prod-
uct life cycle are, the lower the ﬁrm value is.
The effects of the preference for variety parameter γ
on ﬁrm value and corporate policies are also meaningful.
Given that higher values of γ indicate a higher prefer-
ence for variety, and consistent with the direct effect of γ
on cash ﬂows in Eq. (17) , a 1% increase in γ results in a
0.13% increase in proﬁtability and a 0.399% increase in ﬁrm
value. Higher proﬁtability and ﬁrm value means that ﬁrms
have more incentives to invest in physical capital and to
shield their proﬁts from taxes, which results in the elastic-
ities of investment and net leverage being positive when γ
increases.
Finally, we investigate the quantitative implications of
product characteristics on debt capacity, which is an im-
portant channel in the model. As argued before, the prod-
uct life cycle effects induce particular precautionary sav-
ings incentives for ﬁrms. In the counterfactual exercise,
we examine how the magnitude of these incentives is af-
fected by product-level economic forces. The last row of
Table 11 presents the elasticity of debt capacity, measured
as the difference between the maximum debt capacity ωK
and net debt D (both scaled by capital K), to changes in
the old product-speciﬁc discount. The results suggest that
product characteristics can largely magnify ﬁrms’ incen-
tives to preserve debt capacity. For example, less frequent
product introductions lower ﬁrms’ incentives to preserve
debt capacity. The effects of varying the exposure to the
product life cycle channel, by altering the old product-
speciﬁc discount, are even stronger: more severe product
life cycle effects result in stronger precautionary savings
motives. This happens because the ﬁrm can lose a larger
fraction of revenue due to product exit, which makes it
value spare debt capacity more. This is the reason why the
elasticity of debt capacity to ξ is negative: the less impor-
tant product life cycle effects are, the less do ﬁrms worry
about preserving debt capacity. This ﬁnding also highlights
that the ﬁnancing behavior induced by the product life cy-
cle channel would be absent in standard dynamic models
of the ﬁrm that do not account for product-level dynamics.
In other words, product life cycle magniﬁes the precaution-
ary savings effects.
5.1.3. Industry structure implications
To understand the quantitative and qualitative impli-
cations of our model for industry structure, we consider
how the model-implied industry concentration, calculated
as the inverse of industry granularity F. Fig. 7 presents the
results.
As discussed in Section 3 , when an underlying product
or ﬁrm characteristic changes, the industry granularity F
adjusts so that the budget constraint of the representative
consumer in Eq. (9) is satisﬁed. Fig. 7 shows that increas-
ing the old product-speciﬁc discount ξ results in higher in-
dustry concentration, which is due to higher proﬁtability
and lower product portfolio age of ﬁrms in the industry.
Higher product introduction costs also result in higher im-
plied concentration, as when it is more expensive to intro-
duce new products, ﬁrms will do so less often, resulting in
less granular, and hence more concentrated, industry and
ﬁrms having smaller product portfolios.
5.2. Robustness
To examine the robustness of the results, we ﬁrst in-
vestigate how our estimated model performs at replicating
a number of non-targeted moments. We also implement
three extensions of the model, which allow us to study
the effects of endogenizing product withdrawals, account-
ing for product line cannibalization when introducing new
products, and the product portfolio implications for debt
and equity ﬁnancing. 25
5.2.1. Non-targeted moments
To assess the ﬁt of the model, we analyze whether
the model can match several moments which are not tar-
geted in the estimation. In particular, we examine whether
we can replicate the correlation between product portfo-
lio age and moments such as investment, net leverage,
proﬁtability, product entry and exit rates. We do so by
closely following the empirical policy function framework
of Bazdresch et al. (2017) , i.e., by regressing each vari-
able on the beginning-of-period product portfolio age and
a host of controls, matching the state variables in the
model: size, leverage and proﬁtability (and also control-
ling for ﬁrm and time ﬁxed effects that are not present in
the model-generated data). Table 12 presents the resulting
model- and data-implied moments.
We ﬁnd that our model provides a surprisingly good
match to the six non-targeted moments. Despite not us-
ing any correlations between moments in the estimation
procedure, we can replicate the sign of the regression co-
eﬃcient correctly for each variable. Effectively, our model
25 In the model and the estimation, we focus on net debt. In the Inter-
net Appendix C, Section 3 , we consider an additional robustness test and
show in Table C.3 that accounting for different combinations of cash and
debt that yield the same net leverage does not materially affect the main
results.
956

===== PAGE 26 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
Fig. 7. Industry structure and product characteristics. The graphs show the relationship between the model-implied industry concentration, computed as
1 / F , where F is the granularity of the industry, and model parameters: the old product-speciﬁc revenue discount ξ and the product introduction cost
η. Each point on the curve corresponds to the model-implied concentration from a counterfactual experiment, starting from the baseline estimates of
structural parameters and changing only the respective parameter by 10% up and 10% down. Each curve is a second-order polynomial interpolation of
moments from a discrete set of counterfactual experiments.
Table 12
Non-targeted moments. The table reports the regression coeﬃcients of
old product share, the proxy of product portfolio age, from regressing
each variable on the beginning-of-period product portfolio age and a host
of controls (size, leverage and proﬁtability) that mimic the state variables
in the model, while also accounting for ﬁrm- and time ﬁxed effects. All
data variables are winsorized at 2.5% and 97.5% percentile. Appendix B
provides a description of all variables.
Variable Coeﬃcient
Model Data
Investment -0.062 -0.020
Net leverage -0.049 -0.004
Proﬁtability -0.015 -0.003
Entry rate 0.520 0.002
Exit rate 0.103 0.008
captures well the dynamic interactions of the key variables.
This evidence provides a further empirical backing for the
model.
5.2.2. Endogenous product exit
In the main speciﬁcation of the model, each product ex-
its with an exogenously speciﬁed (but data-implied) proba-
bility, as shown in Eq. (5) . We now proceed to relaxing this
assumption to better understand the effect of this mod-
eling choice on our estimates. To do so, we allow ﬁrms
to withdraw old products from their portfolio. This means
that ﬁrms are now able to repurpose the existing produc-
tive capacity towards newer products that they supply.
To implement the endogenous product exit, we specify
that every period, each ﬁrm can decide to withdraw /Delta1o
old products. If it does so, it has to incur a product portfo-
lio adjustment cost κK · /Delta1o which is related to the fact that
this part of capital was speciﬁc to the products that are be-
ing withdrawn. 26 The product transition probabilities are
26 Evidence in Table 4 provides support for a ﬁxed cost speciﬁcation of
the product withdrawal cost.
also affected, as the probability of exit is no longer exoge-
nous. As such, we only infer the probability of a new prod-
uct becoming old p n → o from the data by assuming that
each new product spends half of its lifespan being new.
To make sure that we correctly capture the time spent be-
ing old, we proxy the probability of product exit 1 − q o→ o
by its empirical counterpart, the exit rate, in the estima-
tion procedure. This moment, which also helps identify the
product portfolio withdrawal cost parameter κ, is deﬁned
as the number of product withdrawals divided by the total
number of products in ﬁrms’ product portfolios. We esti-
mate the extended model exactly as in our baseline indus-
try equilibrium case outlined in Section 4 .
The extended model features a new trade-off faced by
ﬁrms when adjusting the old product stock. In partic-
ular, when deciding on product withdrawals, ﬁrms will
on the one hand beneﬁt from removing old products, as
their product portfolio effectively becomes younger, which
boosts existing products’ revenue. On the other hand, each
product withdrawal incurs a ﬁxed product portfolio adjust-
ment cost. This additional trade-off affects ﬁrms’ policies
and, as such, inﬂuences the underlying structural parame-
ters. The resulting estimates presented in Table 13 indicate
that endogenous product exit has several important impli-
cations for the magnitudes of the estimates.
First, the standard parameters shared with the baseline
model have similar magnitudes, in particular the technol-
ogy parameters describing cash ﬂow dynamics and produc-
tion function curvature. Second, the estimates of product-
level parameters in the extended model differ from the
baseline model. In particular, the old product-speciﬁc rev-
enue discount is estimated at about 47%, as compared to
54% in the main model, while the product introduction
cost is lower. However, the fact that both estimates are
different does not imply that they have been misidentiﬁed
in the baseline model, but rather that their interpretation
is changed. Since ﬁrms will now withdraw old products
when their share in the product portfolio is high, and as
these withdrawals are beneﬁcial, new products must lose a
957

===== PAGE 27 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
Table 13
Structural estimates and model-implied moments: Endogenous product exit. The table reports the structural estimates and the model-implied moments
from the extended model that allows for an endogenous product exit. The industry equilibrium model is estimated using the simulated method of mo-
ments, which chooses model parameters by minimizing the distance between the moments from a simulated panel of ﬁrms and their data counterparts.
Panel A reports the simulated and actual moments and the t -statistics for the differences between the corresponding moments. Panel B reports the esti-
mated parameters and their standard errors, clustered at the ﬁrm-level. θ is the production function curvature; σ is the standard deviation of the prof-
itability shock; ρ is the persistence of the proﬁtability process; δ is the capital depreciation rate; ψ is the investment adjustment cost; ω is the parameter
governing the collateral constraint; η is the product introduction cost; κ is the cost associated with withdrawing a product; ξ is the old product-speciﬁc
revenue discount. Appendix C provides the details about the estimation procedure.
Panel A : Moments
Simulated Actual t-stat
Mean operating proﬁts 0.0318 0.0401 3.797
Variance of operating proﬁts 0.0008 0.0009 0.668
Serial correlation of operating proﬁts 0.0996 0.2093 0.977
Mean investment 0.0201 0.0212 0.757
Variance of investment 0.0004 0.0006 1.962
Serial correlation of investment 0.3515 0.1742 -2.413
Mean net leverage 0.2667 0.1716 -3.621
Variance of net leverage 0.0034 0.0093 4.913
Serial correlation of net leverage 0.8046 0.7848 -0.424
Mean old product share 0.4125 0.4444 3.120
Variance of old product share 0.0381 0.0946 11.185
Serial correlation of old product share -0.0672 0.4392 5.638
Exit rate 0.0210 0.0180 -2.592
Panel B : Parameters
Parameter θ σ ρ δ ψ ω η κ ξ
Estimate 0.6592 0.2563 0.4294 0.0797 0.3659 0.4081 0.0048 0.0099 0.4698
Std. error (0.0068) (0.0085) (0.0458) (0.0008) (0.1278) (0.2108) (0.0029) (0.0032) (0.1562)
larger fraction of revenue when becoming old so that the
old product share and product exit rate in the model can
be matched to their empirical counterparts. In particular,
the parameter κ, which captures the adjustment cost re-
lated to product withdrawal, will adjust so that the trade-
off between the beneﬁt and the cost of withdrawing an
old product allows to match the model-implied and actual
product exit rate. This fact is illustrated in Panel C of Fig. 6 ,
which documents that product portfolio age is strongly af-
fected by the product portfolio adjustment cost κ. In fact,
in the extended model product entry and exit are closely
related, which implies that the magnitude of product in-
troduction cost must change due to the new parameter κ.
Overall, the evidence from the extended model with
endogenous product withdrawal suggests that the effect
of product life cycle on corporate policies can be even
stronger when accounting for additional product frictions.
As such, our evidence is indicative of a lower bound of the
true, possibly even greater, effect of product characteristics
on investment, leverage, and ﬁrm value.
5.2.3. The effects of cannibalization
The product setting in the model is silent on many as-
pects of real-world product portfolio management, for ex-
ample the fact that introducing new products usually re-
sults in negative externalities for existing product lines,
which is known as ‘cannibalization,’ which could play a
role in shaping ﬁrms’ product market strategies. To study
whether this is indeed the case, we examine the quanti-
tative importance of the effects of cannibalization. To this
end, we extend the model by explicitly allowing for a de-
pendence between the number of introduced products and
the probability of existing products becoming old p n → o . In
the extended model, it is parametrized as
˜ p n → o = p n → o +
/Delta1n ∑
p=1
ϵp , (25)
where /Delta1P is the number of products introduced by the
ﬁrm and ϵ can be considered as a parameter related
to ﬁrms’ elasticity of substitution between existing and
new products’ revenues. Since in the model old prod-
ucts generate lower revenue than new ones, we effec-
tively assume that product cannibalization acts by age-
ing products, which is reasonable given that, as argued by
Argente et al. (2021b) , product life cycle is largely due to
changes in customer preferences. We assume that ϵvaries
from 0 (the baseline case) to half of the baseline value
of p n → o . This implies that, when ϵ= p n → o / 2 , the product-
speciﬁc revenue is expected to lower by 21.9% when intro-
ducing one new product, as compared to the “no cannibal-
ization” benchmark. 27
Panel D of Fig. 6 presents the effects of changing the
cannibalization parameter ϵon product portfolio age. New
products now age faster, which translates to higher aver-
age product portfolio age. In unreported results, we also
ﬁnd that product cannibalization also lowers ﬁrms’ debt
capacity, for two reasons. First, ﬁrms ﬁnance product in-
troductions by issuing debt which increases their leverage.
27 The industrial organizations and marketing literature does not spec-
ify a clear-cut candidate for the value of this parameter. For example,
Hottman et al. (2016) estimate the product elasticity of substitution due
to price increases, which implies a cannibalization rate of 0.5 for the me-
dian ﬁrm in their sample. This means that about half of the sales of a
new product introduced by a ﬁrm comes from the sales of existing prod-
ucts and half from the new ones.
958

===== PAGE 28 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
Table 14
Structural estimates and model-implied moments: Collateral constraint dependent on product portfolio age. The table reports the structural estimates and
the model-implied moments from the extended model in which debt capacity depends on product portfolio age. The industry equilibrium model is es-
timated using the simulated method of moments, which chooses model parameters by minimizing the distance between the moments from a simulated
panel of ﬁrms and their data counterparts. Panel A reports the simulated and actual moments and the t -statistics for the differences between the corre-
sponding moments. Panel B reports the estimated parameters and their standard errors, clustered at the ﬁrm-level. θ is the production function curvature;
σ is the standard deviation of the proﬁtability shock; ρ is the persistence of the proﬁtability process; δ is the capital depreciation rate; ψ is the investment
adjustment cost; ω 0 and ω 1 are the parameters governing the collateral constraint; η is the product introduction cost; ξ is the old product-speciﬁc revenue
discount. Appendix C provides the details about the estimation procedure.
Panel A : Moments
Simulated Actual t-stat
Mean operating proﬁts 0.0406 0.0401 -0.209
Variance of operating proﬁts 0.0009 0.0009 0.253
Serial correlation of operating proﬁts 0.3230 0.2093 -1.014
Mean investment 0.0204 0.0212 0.556
Variance of investment 0.0004 0.0006 2.469
Serial correlation of investment 0.2171 0.1742 -0.584
Mean net leverage 0.1996 0.1716 -1.068
Variance of net leverage 0.0066 0.0093 2.214
Serial correlation of net leverage 0.6223 0.7848 3.484
Mean old product share 0.4222 0.4444 2.173
Variance of old product share 0.0885 0.0946 1.216
Serial correlation of old product share 0.4273 0.4392 0.133
Panel B : Parameters
Parameter θ σ ρ δ ψ ω 0 ω 1 η ξ
Estimate 0.6117 0.3021 0.4586 0.0807 0.7384 0.4311 0.2833 0.0079 0.5692
Std. error (0.0060) (0.0257) (0.0268) (0.0039) (0.2818) (0.0680) (0.0339) (0.0010) (0.0538)
Second, higher cannibalization rate results in a more stable
product portfolio structure, which lowers product portfo-
lio age variance and thus also the variance of proﬁtabil-
ity. This affects ﬁrms’ precautionary savings incentives and
results in lower maintained debt capacity. Overall, the ef-
fect of cannibalization can magnify the effects of product
life cycle, but does not alter the main mechanisms through
which product dynamics interact with corporate policies.
5.2.4. Product portfolio implications for debt and equity
ﬁnancing
We have documented that product portfolio structure
have important implications for ﬁrms’ ﬁnancing decisions.
However, so far the effect has been indirect –i t operated
through ﬁrms’ incentive to issue debt or equity and to ﬁ-
nance product introductions. In this section, we extend our
model to better understand whether a direct effect can
be important as well. For example, ﬁrms may be able to
secure a better conditions when raising external funds if
their product portfolios are more attractive, e.g., if they
consist of more new products.
To understand if this effect plays a role in our model,
we analyze two extensions. First, we allow for an ex-
plicit dependence between ﬁrms’ debt capacity and prod-
uct portfolio age. To this end, we extend the collateral con-
straint in Eq. (13) to take the form of
D i ≤ K i × (1 − δ) × (ω 0 − ω 1 × φi ) . (26)
Firms’ debt capacity is now characterized by two parame-
ters: ω 0 , which represents the share of depreciated capital
that can be collateralized independent of product portfo-
lio age, and ω 1 , which captures the fact that older product
portfolios may reduce the available debt capacity as, e.g.,
the capital used to produce these goods or their trademark
value are worth less.
We structurally estimate the extended model and we
identify the new parameter ω 1 by using higher moments
of leverage: as ω 1 increases, the exposure of debt capac-
ity to product portfolio age rises, and as such net lever-
age should be more volatile given that the share of old
products changes as well. On the other hand, ω 0 is iden-
tiﬁed as before, i.e. by using the mean of net leverage.
Table 14 presents the resulting estimates and reveals that
the effect of product portfolio age on debt capacity is sub-
stantial. The estimated ω 1 amounts to 0.2833, which sug-
gests that the collateralized share of depreciated capital is
lower by 0 . 4222 ×0 . 2833 ≈ 12% due to product portfolio
age. Interestingly, we can nearly recover the baseline esti-
mate of ω of 0.3024, which is very close to the one implied
by the extended model: 0 . 4311 −0 . 4222 ×0 . 2833 = 0 . 3115 .
In Panel E of Fig. 6 we show that product portfolio
age decreases with ω 1 , which is intuitive, as ﬁrms inter-
nalize product characteristics when making debt issuance
decisions not only indirectly, but also directly. As such,
when collateral constraint becomes more exposed to prod-
uct portfolio age, ﬁrms choose to lower their product port-
folio age so as to maintain their debt capacity. They do so
by, e.g., introducing more new products.
Finally, we also examine the interaction between prod-
uct portfolio age and equity issuance cost. We model this
interaction as an increase in the equity issuance cost λ that
amounts to a percent λ1 of the old product share φ. That
is, when ﬁrms have φ% of old products in their portfo-
lio, they raise equity at the higher cost of λ + λ1 × φ. As
we estimate the baseline equity issuance cost λ outside of
the model, rather than structurally estimating the exten-
959

===== PAGE 29 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
sion, we analyze its implications by studying the effects of
varying λ1 .
Panel F of Fig. 6 reports the effect of old product share
on equity issuance cost by changing the value of λ1 . The
results show that higher exposure of the equity issuance
cost on product portfolio age results into a very limited
quantitative effect. In fact, the same is true in the data, as
ﬁrms in our sample only rarely engage in SEOs, given that
our sample consists primarily of large, proﬁtable and well-
established companies. The evidence thus suggests that
there is no economically relevant link between product
portfolio structure and equity issuance costs.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we demonstrate that product life cy-
cle has important implications for corporate policies, ﬁrm
value and industry structure by developing and estimating
a dynamic industry equilibrium model of investment, ﬁ-
nancing and product portfolio decisions. In line with the
product life cycle channel, new products are more prof-
itable, and are expected to last longer than old ones. Thus,
when deciding whether to introduce new products, the
ﬁrm trades off the beneﬁts of a younger product portfolio
versus product introduction costs.
We embed the product life cycle channel into a ﬂex-
ible industry equilibrium model of ﬁnancing and invest-
ment that can be taken to the data by means of structural
estimation. In the model, ﬁrms’ product introduction deci-
sions have direct implications for cash ﬂow dynamics. As a
result, investment, ﬁnancing and product decisions are in-
tertwined at the ﬁrm level and spill over to industry struc-
ture. In particular, the model implies that product intro-
ductions and capital investment act as complements and
that product life cycle induces stronger precautionary sav-
ings motives for ﬁrms. These predictions are in line with
empirical stylized facts about product portfolio age, invest-
ment and leverage.
Using detailed data on ﬁrms’ product portfolios, we
structurally estimate the model to quantify the effects of
the product life cycle channel. By doing so, the paper de-
livers three novel results. First, the structural estimates
imply that the product-level forces are quantitatively im-
portant, as products lose 46% of their revenue when they
become old and ﬁrms spend $6.85m per product intro-
duction. Second, the estimated model provides important
cross-sectional predictions, as the estimates suggest that
ﬁrms supplying fewer products, facing less between-ﬁrm
product concentration, and supplying products more sen-
sitive to ageing are also more exposed to the product life
cycle channel. Moreover, by examining characteristics such
as product durability, product offering variety and prod-
uct concentration, we document that product market strat-
egy signiﬁcantly affects ﬁrms’ exposure to product life cy-
cle. Third, by means of counterfactual experiments, we ﬁnd
that product life cycle substantially affects ﬁrm value, in-
dustry structure as well as corporate investment and ﬁ-
nancing decisions. Overall, the data suggests that manag-
ing the life cycle of products, by means of introduction
cost or sensitivity to ageing, yields material beneﬁts to
ﬁrms.
Acknowledgments
Bill Schwert was the editor for this article and Dim-
itris Papanikolaou was the co-editor. We thank an anomy-
mous referee, Theodosios Dimopoulos, Rüdiger Fahlen-
brach, Laurent Frésard, Thomas Geelen, Daniel Kim, Evgeny
Lyanders (AFA discussant), Erwan Morellec, Diane Pierret,
Nagpurnanand Prabhala, Lukas Schmid, Norman Schürhoff,
Roberto Steri, Suzanne Vissers (SFI discussant), Toni
Whited, Yufeng Wu (FIRS and WFA discussant) as well
as seminar participants at BI Oslo, Copenhagen Business
School, HEC Montréal, JHU Carey, McGill, Michigan Ross,
Pittsburgh Katz, UNIL, UGA and USI as well as to 4th HEC
Paris Finance Workshop, SFI Research Days 2019, FIRS 2019,
WFA 2020 and AFA 2021.
Appendix
The Appendix consists of three sections. Section Ap-
pendix A provides more details about the product data and
sample selection. Section Appendix B contains the deﬁni-
tions of variables. Section Appendix C describes the struc-
tural estimation procedure.
Appendix A. Product market data
A1. Data description
We use data from the Nielsen Homescan (NH) to obtain
information about ﬁrms’ product market strategies. An ex-
tensive description of the database can also be found in
e.g. Broda and Weinstein (2010) or Hottman et al. (2016) .
The data contains three dimensions: household, product
and time. Each household in the sample reports the prices
and quantities of items purchased during each shopping
trip and any potential discounts or deals associated with
the purchases. Overall, the data contains a representative
sample of approximately 40,0 0 0-60,0 0 0 households strati-
ﬁed into 61 geographic areas in the US. The sample is de-
signed so that it can be projected to the total US popu-
lation (projection factors are available). In total, the data
spans over the period of 2004–2018.
A2. Product classiﬁcation in NH
Each product in the data belongs to speciﬁc categories,
varying in their granularity. The categories include Depart-
ments (11), Product Groups ( ≈ 125), Modules ( ≈ 1,075) and
UPC codes ( ≈ 4.3 million; ≈ 2.3 million thereof are in the
consumer panel ﬁles). Most products also have a speciﬁc
brand. An example of product classiﬁcation is presented in
Table A.1 .
The most granular level of product categories is the
UPC code. Each UPC code is 12-digit long and the ﬁrst 6
to 11 digits are a unique identiﬁer of the ﬁrm to which
the product belongs (‘GCP code’). However, ﬁrms can have
many GCP codes. To obtain all possible combinations, all
GCP codes are collected using the GLN code, issued by GS1
(which also manages the issuance of the UPC codes). The
GLN code is used to identify physical locations or legal en-
tities of the ﬁrms. The key is 12 digits long and comprises
960

===== PAGE 30 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
Table A. 1
Example of a product in the data. Details of ‘NESTLE USA 8.47 OZ (240g) Nescafe Frothe Latte Coffee Drink’.
Compustat identiﬁer GS1 identiﬁer product identiﬁer product department product group product module product brand
(6 digits) (13 digits) (12 digits) DRY GROCERY CANDY CANDY –CHOCOLATE HERSHEY’S KISSES
Table A.2
Summary statistics of different product classiﬁcations. Each classiﬁcation contains data from 38,386 uniquely identiﬁed
ﬁrms in Nielsen Homescan.
mean sd q1 med q3 min max
# UPCs 57.19 493.04 2 5 17 1 36,389
# brand-modules 8.83 37.30 1 2 5 1 1,742
# brands 4.68 17.75 1 1 3 1 1,128
# product modules 4.82 22.56 1 2 3 0 798
# product groups 2.44 5.12 1 1 2 0 111
# departments 1.37 0.88 1 1 1 0 11
Table A.3
Sales’ shares of matched ﬁrms. The table presents summary statistics concerning the sales’ shares of matched ﬁrms,
computed as the ratio of the projected sales of each matched Compustat ﬁrm-quarter to its actual sales in that quarter.
Only industries with at least 10% average projected sales’ share and at least 50 observations were included. All variables
are winsorized at 2.5 and 97.5% percentile.
mean sd p25 median p75 N
Food & Kindred Products 0.518 0.502 0.159 0.402 0.737 2355
Chemical & Allied Products 0.256 0.416 0.027 0.075 0.267 1092
Electronic & Other Electric Equipment 0.190 0.289 0.002 0.014 0.312 427
Paper & Allied Products 0.112 0.167 0.006 0.032 0.212 387
Fabricated Metal Products 0.302 1.277 0.004 0.015 0.196 209
Agricultural Production - Crops 0.543 0.305 0.293 0.529 0.746 108
Tobacco Products 0.186 0.097 0.103 0.136 0.274 96
Rubber & Miscellaneous Plastics Products 0.185 0.165 0.046 0.091 0.360 88
Apparel & Accessory Stores 0.132 0.179 0.000 0.016 0.275 55
Total 0.373 0.520 0.038 0.219 0.579 4894
a GS1 Company Preﬁx, Location Reference, and Check Digit.
Both the GCP code as well as the GLN codes are obtained
from the GEPIR database provided by POD, which addition-
ally contains the full name and the address of each ﬁrm.
Overall, the POD database is able to match 3.4 millions
UPCs ( ≈ 78% of all available products and ≈ 96% of product
data available in the consumer panel ﬁles) which belong to
38,386 ﬁrms.
Table A.2 contains the summary statistics of ﬁrm-level
number of products per category. It indicates the large de-
gree of heterogeneity in the data: while an average ﬁrm
owns roughly 8.82 products, a typical (median) ﬁrm owns
only 2. Similar conclusions can be drawn from looking at
other classiﬁcations of products.
A3. Merging with compustat
The ﬁrm-product data can be merged with Compustat
by ﬁrm names. However, many public ﬁrms own multiple
subsidiaries and the ﬁrm-product data could contain the
subsidiary name rather the one of the parent company. For
example, in the product data, P&G directly owns most of
the products while Newell Brands only owns its products
through some of the 121 subsidiaries. We obtain the names
of subsidiaries of Compustat ﬁrms from Capital IQ.
The text matching procedure is conducted using fuzzy
merging. The matching scores are based on GEDSCORE,
SPEDIS and % of the same 3-character combinations of one
company name in the other. All punctuation, special char-
acters and common words are removed before conducting
the comparison. After the merge, we manually verify ev-
ery match and additionnaly add ﬁrms with at least 200
UPC codes to the data (out of all unmatched ﬁrms with
more than 800 UPC codes –4 7 7 ﬁrms –1 5 % turned out
to be public or subsidiaries of public ﬁrms). In total, we
ware able to merge 1376 GLN-level ﬁrms (or subsidiaries)
from the ﬁrm-product data, which corresponds to 702 US-
headquartered Compustat ﬁrms.
To further verify the quality of the matching procedure,
we analyze ﬁrms’ ‘sales share’, i.e. the ratio of the pro-
jected sales (to the whole US; computed using the pro-
jection factors in the data) of each matched Compustat
ﬁrm in a given quarter to its actual sales in that quarter.
Table A.3 contains the summary statistics on sales share
for 2-digit SIC industries.
Table A.3 suggests that not all industries are equally
well-covered in the data. For example, Agriculture and
Food industries are relatively well matched. Other in-
dustries, such as Electronic and Chemicals, are character-
ized by large degree of within-industry dispersion in sales
share. This is related to the fact that NH data focuses
on particular product categories, which are only partially
present in some industries. For example, Procter and Gam-
ble’s product portfolio is relatively well-captured in the
data and is primarily captured in the Chemicals sector,
which also contains other ﬁrms with low sales share. How-
961

===== PAGE 31 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
ever, the matched sample contains primarily ﬁrms from
the ‘food’ industry, which comprises two SIC2 codes: 01
and 20, and these ﬁrms rely heavily on the retail channel
in generating sales.
A4. Sample selection
To reﬁne the data for further empirical analysis, we
ﬁrst apply the standard Compustat data ﬁlters: we remove
ﬁrms with missing data on any variables used in structural
estimation, market-to-book larger than 15 or negative book
equity. Based on the matched sample, we remove all ﬁnan-
cial conglomerates (SIC ≥ 60 0 0 ). We require that ﬁrm’s pro-
jected sales share be at least 5% and no more than 150% of
its total sales on average. Moreover, we only keep ﬁrms in
industries in which the average projected sales share is at
least 10%. We also remove all ﬁrms which have on average
less than 20 UPC codes. Even though we control for the
sales share in the empirical analysis, this ﬁlter is important
as it disposes of ﬁrms that do no rely on retail channel (so
the main mechanism is unlikely to matter) or that were
plausibly mismatched. As an example, this ﬁlter removes
ﬁrms such as American Crystal Sugar Co or Archer-Daniels-
Midland Co. for whom the retail channel is clearly of sec-
ondary if not tertiary importance. Another example of such
a ﬁrm would be Amazon, which oftentimes sell own prod-
ucts in retail stores, but these do not constitute the main
source of revenues for Amazon. To mitigate the concerns
of mistaking acquired products as being new, we remove
all merged ﬁrms from our sample; a prominent example
of which is Kraft/Heinz. Additionally, we manually control
for many other product line acquisitions over the sample
period that we managed to identify in the news or in the
data. Finally, we winsorize the remaining data at 2.5% and
97.5% level. The ﬁnal sample spans 2004Q1 to 2018Q4 and
contains 2319 ﬁrm-quarter observations. 28
Appendix B. Data and stylized facts
B1. Deﬁnitions of variables
This section presents the deﬁnitions of variables used
throughout the paper.
1. Product portfolio age – weighted share of old prod-
ucts in the portfolio:
age it = weighted # of products with age exceeding 50% of lifespan (it)
total # of products (it) ,
(27)
where the weights correspond to product-speciﬁc
revenues. Given the deﬁnition of the proxy, we ex-
clude ﬁrst and last two years of the data when com-
puting the proxy to make sure that product portfolio
age is correctly captured.
28 The ﬁrst and last two years of the sample are excluded, similar to
Argente et al. (2018, 2021b) , when computing the proxies of product port-
folio age and when identifying product introduction and withdrawal de-
cisions, given the procedure for constructing these proxies. The primary
reason is due to the fact that we need to ensure that we correctly cap-
ture product entry and exit dates.
2. Product portfolio size –e f f e c t i v e number of prod-
ucts at level x, x ∈ [ upc , bm ] :
ef f _ no _ prod it = 1 /rc _ x it , (28)
where rx _ x is the revenue concentration at level x :
rc _ x it =
H it −1 /N it
1 −1 /N it
, with H it =
N it ∑
x=1
(
r _ sale xt
∑  N it
x=1 r _ sale xt
)2
,
(29)
where r _ sale xt are the estimated aggregate retail
sales for each x ∈ { upc , bm } product at time t. To
see where the measure for the effective number
of products stems from, suppose that a ﬁrm sup-
plies N products. Then its revenue concentration is
rc =
∑  N
i =1 s 2
i , where s i is the share of product i in
the ﬁrm’s sales. Assuming all products provide equal
revenue, their revenue share is then s i = s = 1 /N,
thus the HHI is now rc =
∑  N
i =1 1 /N 2 = N/N 2 = 1 /N,
which implies that we can back out the ‘effective’
number of products as ef f _ no _ prod = 1 /rc.
3. Product portfolio adjustments –n e t product entry:
netproductentry it = weightedentryrate it −weightedexitrate it ,
(30)
where entry rate and exit rate are deﬁned as in
Argente et al. (2018) and where the weights cor-
respond to market-speciﬁc revenues, using product
groups as the deﬁnition of a market. An ‘entry’ in-
dicates an introductions of a new product that has
never been offered by ﬁrm i before time t and an
‘exit’ indicates a product that was no longer supplied
by ﬁrm i after time t. We exclude the ﬁrst and last
two years of the data when computing the proxy
and require ﬁrms to have at least 20 UPCs to make
sure that product entry and exit rates are correctly
captured.
4. Product exit rate :
exit rate it = # product withdrawals (it)) / total # products ( it)
(31)
We exclude ﬁrst and last two years of the data when
retrieving product withdrawals to make sure that
product exit rate is correctly captured. Alternatively,
when using the exit rate to estimate the model, it is
calculated as the weighted average of product with-
drawals where the weights correspond to market-
speciﬁc revenues, using product groups as the def-
inition of a market.
5. Net product creation : deﬁned as net product en-
try, except using the value of revenue created or de-
stroyed when introducing or withdrawing products,
respectively, as a share of total product revenue.
6. Market-to-book : book value of debt plus market
value of equity over total assets.
7. Investment : capital expenditure minus asset sales
over gross PPE.
8. Net leverage : book debt minus cash and short-term
investments over book debt plus book equity.
962

===== PAGE 32 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
9. Cash : cash and short-term investments over total as-
sets.
10. Firm size : natural logarithm of real total assets.
11. Proﬁtability : operating income over total assets.
12. Firm age :
ﬁrmage it = − 1
1 + listingage it
, where listingage it = t −t i0 ,
(32)
with t i 0 being the ﬁrst appearance of ﬁrm i
in CRSP, as in Pástor and Veronesi (2003) or
Loderer et al. (2017) .
13. Cash ﬂow volatility : the rolling standard deviations
of proﬁtability, computed over the past 8 quarters.
14. Tangibility : net property, plant and equipment over
total assets.
15. Cost of sales : general and administrative expense
over total assets.
16. Product revenue growth : the growth rate of non-
durable consumer good revenue.
17. Between-ﬁrm product concentration :
bhhi it =
M ∑
p=1
s pit H H I pt , (33)
where s pit is the share of ﬁrm’s i sales in product
group p at time t, and H H I pt is the Herﬁndahl of
product group p at time t, computed using all ﬁrms
available in the sample, both public and private.
18. Product durability : average calendar age of prod-
ucts at exit.
19. Product offering variety : the ratio of the number
of brand-modules offered by a ﬁrm to the number
of product groups.
20. Within-ﬁrm product concentration :
whhi it =
M ∑
p=1
s pit H H I UP C
pit , (34)
where s pit is the share of ﬁrm’s i sales in product
group p at time t, and H H I UP C
pit is the Herﬁndahl of
ﬁrm’s i UPC-level revenues in product group p at
time t.
Appendix C. Structural estimation
We follow Lee and Ingram (1991) when estimating
the model using structural method of moments. As in
Hennessy and Whited (2007) , we extract as much of ob-
served heterogeneity from data as possible to make the
model- and data-implied moments comparable, that is we
use within-transformed variables to compute all moments
except for means, which are computed using the raw data.
Let the pooled time series of all ﬁrms be x i = x 1 , . . . , x N ,
where N = n × T is the total number of ﬁrm-year obser-
vations. Using the transformed data, we compute a set of
moments h (x i ) .
We create the simulated moments by ﬁrst solv-
ing the model given a vector of parameters β =
(θ, σ, ρ, δ, ψ, ω, η, ξ) and then generating simulated data
y from the model. We simulate S = 10 datasets of N =
2 , 0 0 0 ﬁrm-quarters, following Michaelides and Ng (20 0 0) ,
who ﬁnd that a simulation estimator behaves well in ﬁ-
nite samples if the simulated sample is approximately ten
times as large as the actual data sample. The resulting mo-
ments in a given simulated sample are given by the vector
h (y s , β) .
The simulated methods of moments estimator ˆ β is then
the solution to
ˆ β = arg min
β
[ g(x) −g(y , β) ] ′ W [ g(x) −g(y , β) ] , (35)
where g(x ) = 1
N
∑  N
i =1 h (x i ) and g(y, β) = 1
S
∑  S
s =1 h (y s , β)
are the sample means of the actual and model-implied
data, and W a positive deﬁnite weight matrix. We use
the optimal clustered weight matrix constructed as in
Bazdresch et al. (2017) . We use simulated annealing to ﬁnd
the optimum to the minimization problem.
Under mild regularity conditions, the SMM estimator is
asymptotically normal
√
N ( ˆ β − β)
d
−→ N ( 0 , V ) , (36)
where V is the covariance matrix as in Newey and McFad-
den (1994) .
Supplementary material
Supplementary material associated with this article can
be found, in the online version, at doi: 10.1016/j.jﬁneco.
2022.09.003
References
Abernathy, W.J., Utterback, J.M., 1978. Patterns of industrial innovation.
Technol. Rev. 80, 40–47 .
Andrews, I., Gentzkow, M., Shapiro, J.M., 2017. Measuring the sensitivity
of parameter estimates to estimation moments. Q. J. Econ. 132, 1553–
1592. doi: 10.1093/qje/qjx023 .
Argente, D., Hanley, D., Baslandze, S., Moreira, S., 2021a. Patents to prod-
ucts: Product innovation and ﬁrm dynamics. Unpublished working pa-
per. Pennsylvania State University.
Argente, D., Lee, M., Moreira, S., 2018. Innovation and product reallocation
in the great recession. J. Monet. Econ. 93, 1–20. doi: 10.1016/j.jmoneco.
2017.11.003 .
Argente, D., Lee, M., Moreira, S., 2021b. The life cycle of products: ev-
idence and implications. Unpublished working paper. Pennsylvania
State University.
Bazdresch, S., Kahn, R.J., Whited, T.M., 2017. Estimating and testing dy-
namic corporate ﬁnance models. Rev. Financ. Stud. 31, 322–361.
doi: 10.1093/rfs/hhx080 .
Benkard, C.L., Yurukoglu, A., Zhang, A.L., 2021. Concentration in Prod-
uct Markets, Working Paper, 28745. National Bureau of Economic Re-
search doi: 10.3386/w28745 .
Bernard, A.B., Redding, S.J., Schott, P.K., 2010. Multiple-product ﬁrms and
product switching. Am. Econ. Rev. 100, 70–97. doi: 10.1257/aer.100.1.
70 .
Broda, C., Weinstein, D.E., 2010. Product creation and destruction: evi-
dence and price implications. Am. Econ. Rev. 100, 691–723. doi: 10.
1257/aer.100.3.691 .
Chevalier, J.A., 1995. Capital structure and product-market competition:
empirical evidence from the supermarket industry. Am. Econ. Rev. 85,
415–435 .
Chevalier, J.A., 1995. Do LBO supermarkets charge more? an empirical
analysis of the effects of LBOs on supermarket pricing. J. Financ. 50,
1095–1112. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-6261.1995.tb04051.x .
Clara, N., Corhay, A., Kung, H., 2021. Firm product concentration and asset
prices. Unpublished working paper. Duke University.
Clayton, G., 2017. Product market strategy and capital structure: evidence
from resale price maintenance. Unpublished working paper. Univer-
sity of Kentucky.
D’Acunto, F., Liu, R., Pﬂueger, C., Weber, M., 2018. Flexible prices and lever-
age. J. Financ. Econ. 129, 46–68. doi: 10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2018.03.009 .
963

===== PAGE 33 =====

J. Hajda and B. Nikolov Journal of Financial Economics 146 (2022) 932–964
DeAngelo, H., DeAngelo, L., Whited, T.M., 2011. Capital structure dynamics
and transitory debt. J. Financ. Econ. 99, 235–261. doi: 10.1016/j.jﬁneco.
2010.09.005 .
Deaton, A., 1997. The Analysis of Household Surveys. The World Bank
doi: 10.1596/0- 8018- 5254- 4 .
Frésard, L., 2010. Financial strength and product market behavior: the real
effects of corporate cash holdings. J. Financ. 65, 1097–1122. doi: 10.
1111/j.1540-6261.2010.01562.x .
Gamba, A., Triantis, A., 2008. The value of ﬁnancial ﬂexibility. J. Financ.
63, 2263–2296. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-6261.2008.01397.x .
Geelen, T., Hajda, J., Morellec, E., 2022. Can corporate debt foster inno-
vation and growth? Rev. Financ. Stud. 35, 4152–4200. doi: 10.1093/rfs/
hhab129 .
Glover, B., 2015. The expected cost of default. J. Financ. Econ. 119, 284–
299. doi: 10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2015.09.007 .
Gomes, J., 2001. Financing investment. Am. Econ. Rev. 91, 1263–1285.
doi: 10.1257/aer.91.5.1263 .
Gourio, F., Rudanko, L., 2014. Customer capital. Rev. Econ. Stud. 81, 1102–
1136. doi: 10.1093/restud/rdu007 .
Han, C., Phillips, P., 2010. GMM estimation for dynamic panels with ﬁxed
effects and strong instruments at unity. Econom. Theory 26, 119–151.
doi: 10.1017/S026646660909063X .
Hellmann, T., Puri, M., 20 0 0. The interaction between product market and
ﬁnancing strategy: the role of venture capital. Rev. Financ. Stud. 13,
959–984. doi: 10.1093/rfs/13.4.959 .
Hennessy, C.A., Whited, T.M., 2005. Debt dynamics. J. Financ. 60, 1129–
1165. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-6261.20 05.0 0758.x .
Hennessy, C.A., Whited, T.M., 2007. How costly is external ﬁnancing? Ev-
idence from a structural estimation. J. Financ. 62, 1705–1745. doi: 10.
1111/j.1540-6261.2007.01255.x .
Hoberg, G., Maksimovic, V., 2021. Product life cycles in corporate ﬁnance
doi: 10.1093/rfs/hhab134 . Forthcoming
Hottman, C.J., Redding, S.J., Weinstein, D.E., 2016. Quantifying the sources
of ﬁrm heterogeneity. Q. J. Econ. 131, 1291–1364. doi: 10.1093/qje/
qjw012 .
Kovenock, D., Phillips, G., 1995. Capital structure and product-market ri-
valry: how do we reconcile theory and evidence? Am. Econ. Rev. 85,
403–408 .
Kovenock, D., Phillips, G., 1997. Capital structure and product market be-
havior: an examination of plant exit and investment decisions. Rev.
Financ. Stud. 10, 767–803. doi: 10.1093/rfs/10.3.767 .
Lee, B.S., Ingram, B.F., 1991. Simulation estimation of time-series models.
J. Econom. 47, 197–205. doi: 10.1016/0304- 4076(91)90098- X .
Levitt, T., 1965. Exploit the product life cycle. Harv. Bus. Rev. 43, 81–94 .
Livdan, D., Nezlobin, A., 2021. Investment, capital stock, and replacement
cost of assets when economic depreciation is non-geometric. J. Financ.
Econ. 142, 14 4 4–1469. doi: 10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2021.05.021 .
Loderer, C., Stulz, R., Waelchli, U., 2017. Firm rigidities and the decline in
growth opportunities. Manag. Sci. 63, 30 0 0–3020. doi: 10.1287/mnsc.
2016.2478 .
MacKay, P., 2003. Real ﬂexibility and ﬁnancial structure: an em-
pirical analysis. Rev. Financ. Stud. 16, 1131–1165. doi: 10.1093/rfs/
hhg022 .
Maksimovic, V., 1988. Capital structure in repeated oligopolies. RAND J.
Econ. 19, 389–407. doi: 10.2307/2555663 .
Mann, W., 2018. Creditor rights and innovation: evidence from patent col-
lateral. J. Financ. Econ. 130, 25–47. doi: 10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2018.07.001 .
Melser, D., Syed, I.A., 2015. Life cycle price trends and product replace-
ment: implications for the measurement of inﬂation. Rev. Income
Wealth 62, 509–533. doi: 10.1111/roiw.12166 .
Michaelides, A., Ng, S., 20 0 0. Estimating the rational expectations model
of speculative storage: a Monte Carlo comparison of three simula-
tion estimators. J. Econom. 96, 231–266. doi: 10.1016/S0304-4076(99)
0 0 058-5 .
Michaels, R., Page, T.B., Whited, T.M., 2018. Labor and capital dynamics
under ﬁnancing frictions. Rev. Financ. 23, 279–323. doi: 10.1093/rof/
rfy020 .
Morellec, E., Nikolov, B., Schürhoff, N., 2012. Corporate governance and
capital structure dynamics. J. Financ. 67, 803–848. doi: 10.1111/j.
1540-6261.2012.01735.x .
Morellec, E., Nikolov, B., Schürhoff, N., 2018. Agency conﬂicts around the
world. Rev. Financ. Stud. 31, 4232–4287. doi: 10.1093/rfs/hhy018 .
Newey, W.K., McFadden, D., 1994. Chapter 36: large sample estimation
and hypothesis testing. In: Handbook of Econometrics. In: of Hand-
book of Econometrics, Vol. 4. Elsevier, pp. 2111–2245. doi: 10.1016/
s1573-4412(05)80 0 05-4 .
Nikolov, B., Schmid, L., Steri, R., 2018. Dynamic corporate liquidity. J. Fi-
nanc. Econ. 132, 76–102. doi: 10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2017.06.018 .
Nikolov, B., Schmid, L., Steri, R., 2021. The sources of ﬁnancing constraints.
J. Financ. Econ. 139, 478–501. doi: 10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2020.07.018 .
Nikolov, B., Whited, T.M., 2014. Agency conﬂicts and cash: estimates from
a dynamic model. J. Financ. 69, 1883–1921. doi: 10.1111/joﬁ.12183 .
Parsons, C., Titman, S., 2008. Capital structure and corporate strategy. In:
Eckbo, B.E. (Ed.), Handbook of Empirical Corporate Finance, Vol. 2. El-
sevier, San Diego, pp. 203–234 . Handbooks in Finance
Pástor, L., Veronesi, P., 2003. Stock valuation and learning about proﬁtabil-
ity. J. Financ. 58, 1749–1789. doi: 10.1111/1540-6261.00587 .
Peters, R.H., Taylor, L.A., 2017. Intangible capital and the investment- q re-
lation. J. Financ. Econ. 123, 251–272. doi: 10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2016.03.011 .
Phillips, G., 1995. Increased debt and industry product markets an empir-
ical analysis. J. Financ. Econ. 37, 189–238. doi: 10.1016/0304-405X(94)
00785-Y .
Redding, S.J., Weinstein, D.E., 2019. Measuring aggregate price indices
with taste shocks: theory and evidence for CES preferences. Q. J. Econ.
135, 503–560. doi: 10.1093/qje/qjz031 .
Spence, M., 2009. Capital Structure and the corporation’s product market
environment. In: Friedman, B.M. (Ed.), Corporate Capital Structures in
the United States. University of Chicago Press, pp. 353–382. doi: 10.
7208/9780226264233-013 .
Suh, P., 2019. Property Rights and Debt Financing. University of Georgia .
Unpublished working paper
Taylor, L., 2010. Why are CEOs rarely ﬁred? evidence from a structural
estimation. J. Financ. 65, 2051–2087. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-6261.2010.
01610.x .
Taylor, L., 2013. CEO Wage dynamics: estimates from a learning model. J.
Financ. Econ. 108, 79–98. doi: 10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2012.11.008 .
Titman, S., 1984. The effect of capital structure on a ﬁrm’s liquida-
tion decision. J. Financ. Econ. 13, 137–151. doi: 10.1016/0304-405X(84)
90035-7 .
Titman, S., Wessels, R., 1988. The determinants of capital structure choice.
J. Financ. 43, 1–19. doi: 10.2307/2328319 .
Valta, P., 2012. Competition and the cost of debt. J. Financ. Econ. 105, 661–
682. doi: 10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2012.04.004 .
Warusawitharana, M., Whited, T.M., 2016. Equity market misvaluation, ﬁ-
nancing, and investment. Rev. Financ. Stud. 29, 603–654. doi: 10.1093/
rfs/hhv066 .
Wu, Y., 2018. What’s behind smooth dividends? Evidence from structural
estimation. Rev. Financ. Stud. 31, 3979–4016. doi: 10.1093/rfs/hhx119 .
Xu, Z., 2021. Trademark Collateral and Debt Financing. UNSW . Unpub-
lished working paper.
964