

===== PAGE 1 =====

Journal of Financial Economics 143 (2022) 1275–1294
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Financial Economics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfec
Liquidity, pledgeability, and the nature of lending /p82
Douglas W. Diamond a , b , ∗, Yunzhi Hu c , Raghuram G. Rajan a , b
a University of Chicago, Booth School of Business 5807 S Woodlawn Ave, Chicago, IL 60637, United States
b The National Bureau of Economic Research 1050 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge, MA 02138, United States
c University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Kenan-Flagler School of Business, 300 Kenan Center Drive, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, United
States
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 25 May 2020
Revised 17 January 2021
Accepted 4 February 2021
Available online 18 May 2021
JEL classiﬁcation:
G21
G24
G32
G33
Keywords:
Liquidity
Pledgeability
Financial cycle
Monitoring
Loans
Performance-pricing debt
Intermediary capital
a b s t r a c t
We develop a theory of how corporate lending and ﬁnancial intermediation change based
on the fundamentals of the ﬁrm and its environment. We focus on the interaction be-
tween the prospective net worth or liquidity of an industry and the ﬁrm’s internal gover-
nance or pledgeability . Variations in prospective liquidity can induce changes in the nature,
covenants, and quantity of loans that are made, the identity of the lender, and the extent
to which the lender is leveraged. We offer predictions on how these might vary over the
ﬁnancial cycle.
©2 0 2 1 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
/p82 The authors thank the Center for Research in Security Prices at
Chicago Booth, the Fama-Miller Center, the Stigler Center and IGM at
Chicago Booth for research support. We are grateful for helpful comments
from Ron Kaniel (the co-editor), an anonymous referee, Jason Roderick
Donaldson, Ye Li, Arvind Krishnamurthy, S. “Vish” Viswanathan, Ming
Yang, and conference/seminar participants at the 2019 AEA, FIFI, Chicago
Booth, Columbia, SFS Cavalcade, FIRS, Rochester, and IMF. This incorpo-
rates some results from a working paper, Liquidity and securitization.
∗ Corresponding author at: University of Chicago, Booth School of Busi-
ness 5807 S Woodlawn Ave, Chicago, IL 60637, United States.
E-mail addresses:
Douglas.Diamond@chicagobooth.edu (D.W. Diamond), Yunzhi_Hu@kenan-
ﬂagler.unc.edu (Y. Hu),Raghuram.Rajan@chicagobooth.edu (R.G. Rajan).
1. Introduction
The nature of lending in an economy changes over the
ﬁnancial cycle. 1 Clearly, the quantity of debt a borrower
can take on varies. The extent to which banks play an
important role, or give way to more arm’s length lend-
ing also changes. So does the form of debt, whether it has
many covenants or few, whether enforcement requires di-
rect lender intervention or whether the loan contract em-
beds performance pricing so that interest rates adjust to
the borrower’s situation automatically. Finally, changes in
the nature of lending also affect the capital structure of
1 See, for example, Bradley and Roberts (2015) ; Benmelech et al. (2020) ,
and Halling et al. (2020) . For a description of the ﬁnancial cycle, see
Borio (2014) .
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jﬁneco.2021.05.005
0304-405X/© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

===== PAGE 2 =====

D.W. Diamond, Y. Hu and R.G. Rajan Journal of Financial Economics 143 (2022) 1275–1294
intermediaries like banks. A vast empirical literature ex-
amines various aspects of lending, but there is relatively
little theory explaining when one might see some aspects
particularly pronounced. 2 In this paper, we present a parsi-
monious model that attempts to explain why and how the
nature of lending changes with the environment in which
lending takes place.
Since our focus is on the environment, we keep the
nature of the borrowing ﬁrm and the cash ﬂows it gen-
erates ﬁxed, while altering industry-wide ﬁnancing condi-
tions. Speciﬁcally, we alter prospective liquidity by which
we mean the net worth of potential buyers for the ﬁrm’s
assets (though we offer other interpretations later). We an-
alyze how such changes affect the borrower’s incentives to
improve the internal governance of the corporation, as well
as how it alters the nature of lending. More speciﬁcally,
we describe the types of lenders and debt contracts that
are selected by borrowers and the types of actions (such
as verifying or monitoring information) that will be under-
taken by lenders as part of these contracts. To summarize
our main results, starting from a low level, higher prospec-
tive corporate liquidity will initially reduce monitored bor-
rowing from a bank in favor of arm’s length borrowing,
then steadily raise the amount corporations can borrow
arm’s length, and eventually reduce the need for internal
corporate governance to support corporate borrowing. In
parallel, higher prospective corporate liquidity will allow
banks to operate with less capital or higher leverage.
Let us elaborate. Consider an economy where expert
managers bid for an asset producing cash ﬂows, hence-
forth called the ﬁrm. Experts fund their bid by borrow-
ing against the ﬁrm. The winning bidder becomes the in-
cumbent manager of the ﬁrm. The other agents in the
model are investors and ﬁnancial intermediaries, hence-
forth banks. Investors are individuals with some personal
funds to lend, but who do not have the inclination or abil-
ity to engage closely with borrowing ﬁrms. Banks, in con-
trast, can intervene at a cost when a corporate loan goes
off-track. We assume that there are plenty of investors
around, so their ability to ﬁnance ﬁrms directly, or via
banks, is unlimited. Neither investors nor banks can man-
age ﬁrms.
The size of the loan that an expert receives for their
initial bid depends on the debt capacity the ﬁrm can sup-
port. The fundamental agency problem is limited enforce-
ment, i.e., the expert is unwilling to repay if she can avoid
it. When at arm’s length, lenders have two sorts of con-
trol rights, which allow them to be repaid and are the
basis for the expert’s borrowing capacity. First, they have
the right to repossess and sell the ﬁrm’s assets for going-
concern value if payments are missed. This right only re-
quires the frictionless enforcement of property rights in
the economy, which we assume. It has especial value when
there are a large number of potential buyers in the future,
willing to pay a high price for the ﬁrm’s assets. Greater
future wealth amongst experts outside the ﬁrm (that is,
prospective expert liquidity , or more practically, prospective
2 Exceptions include Berlin and Mester (1992) ; Diamond (1991, 1993) ;
Hackbarth et al. (2007) ; Hu (2017) , and Rajan and Winton (1995) .
corporate net worth of other ﬁrms in the industry) leads
to higher prices for the ﬁrm in the resale market, with less
of a ﬁre-sale discount. This increases the upfront availabil-
ity of this asset-sale-based ﬁnancing, as in Gennaioli et al.
(2015) . Clearly, this kind of control right is exogenous to
the ﬁrm and depends on economic and ﬁnancial condi-
tions.
The second right is that lenders can obtain some of the
cash ﬂows generated by the asset directly. Unlike asset-
based rights, which depend on the enforcement of prop-
erty rights, cash ﬂow rights are more endogenous; they
stem from the incumbent expert’s actions improving ﬁrm
governance. These increase the pledgeability of the ﬁrm’s
cash ﬂows so that they are more directly appropriable
by creditors. Raising pledgeability might entail, for exam-
ple, improving accounting quality or setting up a stronger
board so that the expert cannot divert project cash ﬂows
into their own coffers. Higher pledgeability allows the in-
cumbent to borrow more directly against the ﬁrm’s cash
ﬂows.
A key feature in our model is that the two rights in-
teract. In general, both the higher prospective wealth of
non-incumbent experts outside the ﬁrm (that is, prospec-
tive liquidity) as well as the higher amount of the ﬁrm’s
future cash ﬂow that a non-incumbent expert can borrow
against (that is, higher future pledgeability of the ﬁrm’s
cash ﬂows) will increase their future bids for the ﬁrm.
Higher prospective bids will increase debt repayments,
and the willingness of creditors to lend up front. Higher
prospective liquidity and pledgeability thus increase debt ca-
pacity .
Another key feature is that pledgeability is chosen
by the incumbent expert in advance, and it lasts some-
time into the future. Current pledgeability choice clearly
has some impact into the future: once in place, rep-
utable accountants and their accounting practices cannot
be changed instantaneously. Change has to occur slowly,
perhaps at the time the accountant’s term ends, if it is not
to be challenged. In addition, it is plausible but not criti-
cal to our approach that pledgeability takes time to imple-
ment: improving accounting quality is not instantaneous
because it requires adopting new systems and hiring rep-
utable accountants. 3
Consider now the expert incumbent manager’s incen-
tives while setting cash ﬂow pledgeability for the next pe-
riod, after buying the ﬁrm with own funds and borrowed
money. For this to be an interesting decision, we assume
she may have some likelihood of selling the ﬁrm or some
portion of it next period, either because she loses abil-
ity and is no longer capable of running it, or because she
needs to raise ﬁnance for new investments.
If the incumbent has no debt claims outstanding,
she would undoubtedly want to increase pledgeability,
especially if the direct costs of doing so are small; this
would simply increase the proceeds she would obtain
by selling the ﬁrm to non-incumbent experts if she lost
ability. However, when the incumbent expert has taken
3 Section 5.7 describes the impact of removing the assumption that it
takes time to improve pledgeability.
1276

===== PAGE 3 =====

D.W. Diamond, Y. Hu and R.G. Rajan Journal of Financial Economics 143 (2022) 1275–1294
on debt, she will see enhancing cash ﬂow pledgeability
as a double-edged sword. The higher future bid from
non-incumbent experts also enables the upfront lender to
collect more payments if the incumbent stays in control
because the lender has the right to seize the ﬁrm and sell
it when not paid in full. In such situations, the incumbent
has to “buy” the ﬁrm from the lender by outbidding
experts (or repaying the initial loan fully). The higher the
probability the incumbent will retain ability and stay in
control and the higher the outstanding debt, the lower her
incentive to raise pledgeability . This means that when high
pledgeability is needed for debt enforcement, outstanding
debt cannot be very high.
Another way of seeing this is that any incumbent man-
ager always has mixed motives in improving governance
(that is, pledgeability): it enhances her access to new
external ﬁnance but also make existing outside claims
stronger. So the higher the existing claims are relative to
new ﬁnancing needs, the lower her incentives to improve
governance. This is a form of overhang but different from
the conventional one.
Now consider the effect of prospective liquidity on
pledgeability choice. When prospective liquidity is not
high, higher pledgeability, as we have seen, helps increase
outside expert bids. However, experts will never pay more
for the ﬁrm in the future than its fundamental value.
Therefore, when future expert liquidity is very high, non-
incumbent experts will have enough wealth to buy the
ﬁrm at the full fundamental value without needing to
borrow against the ﬁrm’s future cash ﬂows. In this case,
higher pledgeability has no effect on how much experts
will bid to pay for the ﬁrm. In other words, high future
liquidity crowds out the need for pledgeability in enhancing
debt repayments.
Finally, consider banks. For the most part in our paper,
they do not play a direct role in governance. Instead, they
incentivize the borrower to improve pledgeability, which
allows them to lend more upfront. To see this, assume
there is a noisy proxy for pledgeability that is observable
and veriﬁable, and a covenant can be written on it. For
instance, the covenant could be the requirement that the
ﬁrm submit periodic audited ﬁnancial statements. We ex-
amine what happens when the bank observes a covenant
violation, for instance a delayed submission of ﬁnancial
statements, which signals, albeit with noise, that the re-
alized pledgeability is low.
The bank has a number of advantages over arm’s length
lenders with respect to a contractual covenant. It inter-
acts with the borrower continuously and can catch a vi-
olation of the covenant early, it can monitor further to get
a more precise read of pledgeability, and it can liquidate
the ﬁrm early. Early liquidation is different from seizing
and auctioning the ﬁrm for going-concern value or sell-
ing plant and equipment piecemeal. The liquidation value
is not negligible early on because it includes the yet-to-
be-invested portion of the loan amount. Importantly, un-
like going-concern value, it is not dependent on the hu-
man capital of experts Hart and Moore (1994) , and there-
fore liquidation can be used as a credible threat if the in-
cumbent does not raise pledgeability.
Arm’s length loans can also be tied to the covenant, so
long as the consequence of covenant violation is purely a
change in the loan terms. For instance, the contract could
mandate a rise in interest rates if the covenant is violated.
We term such a loan contract performance pricing .
Our main interest is in studying how the equilib-
rium choice of borrowing contract and the type of lender
changes over the ﬁnancial cycle as the level of prospective
liquidity varies. Depending on the level of liquidity, differ-
ent contractual forms of borrowing with differing extents
of ﬁnancial intermediation will maximize the access to up-
front ﬁnance. Competition for access to ﬁnance will force
experts to use the contract and the type of lender with
maximal access.
When prospective expert liquidity is relatively low,
bank lending with covenants is particularly effective. If
the incumbent expert sets pledgeability low, the covenant
will likely be violated and expected future bids for going-
concern value will be low. The (early) liquidation value
will exceed expected future bids, so the bank’s liq-
uidation threat will be credible. This then means the
incumbent will set pledgeability high even when fac-
ing large repayments, knowing that otherwise she risks
liquidation.
As prospective liquidity rises further, expected going-
concern value will exceed the early liquidation value.
The bank’s threat to liquidate will no longer be credi-
ble, which renders its ability to verify information early
and monitor of little value. Yet lending will not cease.
Arm’s length lenders will induce the incumbent expert to
set pledgeability high by limiting the amount of straight
debt they offer. In such a situation, faced with only
moderate levels of repayment of existing debt, and the
need potentially to sell the ﬁrm (or, equivalently, raise
more ﬁnance), the incumbent expert will choose high
pledgeability.
It turns out that with little aggregate uncertainty, even
though performance pricing debt offers more contractual
ﬂexibility than straight debt, it adds nothing to the amount
of funds that can be raised. It will be dominated if there
are small transaction costs associated with its enforce-
ment. However, with suﬃcient aggregate uncertainty and
high prospective liquidity, arm’s length performance pric-
ing debt can raise more than straight debt, when the ag-
gregate state cannot be contracted upon directly. In par-
ticular, the automatic rise in interest rates conditional on
covenant violation gives the incumbent stronger incentives
to increase pledgeability, and allows her to borrow yet
more.
Finally, as the level of prospective liquidity gets very
high, higher pledgeability has little incremental impact
on likely debt repayment. Indeed, the ceiling on debt
needed to maintain incentives for pledgeability becomes
onerous. Instead, experts will take on high leverage up
front, without any intent to raise pledgeability. Investors
will be happy making large “covenant-lite” loans without
covenants or monitoring, relying solely on high prospective
liquidity for repayment.
Importantly, the bank’s capital structure depends on the
nature of the loans it makes, whether the loans need the
bank to take costly unobservable actions such as informa-
tion acquisition or whether they are arm’s length loans
that could be made by any passive investor. If the for-
1277

===== PAGE 4 =====

D.W. Diamond, Y. Hu and R.G. Rajan Journal of Financial Economics 143 (2022) 1275–1294
mer, the bank will have to maintain some “skin in the
game,” that is, a stake in the loans it has made so that
it has the incentive to take these actions: Bank capital
has to be positive when costly bank intermediation ser-
vices are needed. However, as prospective liquidity rises
and the bank can switch to making passive arm’s length
loans, it can become a complete pass through, transferring
the amounts collected from investors to the ﬁrm and vice
versa. It will need no skin in the game, that is, bank cap-
ital. Equivalently, experts will be ﬁnanced directly by in-
vestors through arm’s length loans or bonds. More gen-
erally, periods of high prospective liquidity are periods of
substantial arm’s length lending, high corporate leverage,
and high bank leverage. As we will see, this has implica-
tions for how episodes like the run-up to the global ﬁnan-
cial crisis of 20 07–20 09 are interpreted.
We have associated higher liquidity with high ex-
pert/corporate net worth (stemming from an economy-
wide boom in the real sector). It is plausible that higher
expert bids could also result from accommodative mone-
tary policy, easier credit conditions, rapid ﬁnancial devel-
opment, lax supervision, or even irrational exuberance in
ﬁnancial markets. Any of these will ease the ﬁnancing of
expert bidders, induce higher future bids, and higher lever-
age today, which in turn induces lower pledgeability and
more need for ﬁnancial intermediation. This generalization
would be useful in taking the model to the data.
Our paper follows an earlier paper Diamond et al.
(2020) on industry liquidity and ﬁrms’ pledgeability
choices. It is closely related to Gennaioli et al. (2015) ,
where the liquidity of asset acquirers increases the re-
sale value of assets, to Acharya and Viswanathan (2011) ,
where this allows highly levered entities to borrow, and
Eisfeldt and Rampini (20 06, 20 08) where this reduces
moral hazard. Dow et al. (2005) study the choice of
pledgeability, assuming that debt ﬁnance increases pledge-
abilty. Philippon (2006) presents a model where investors
tolerate poor corporate governance in booms which cre-
ates over-investment. This can lead to worse outcomes as
shown in Johnson et al. (20 0 0) . Manove et al. (2001) shows
that collateral value, if independent of the project’s out-
come, weaken the bank’s screening incentives. Closely re-
lated models where ﬁnancial intermediation improves ac-
cess to ﬁnance include Diamond (1984) ; Holmstrom and
Tirole (1997) and Rampini and Viswanathan (2010) . In
Hanson et al. (2015) , deposit-insurance-backed banks have
stable funding and ﬁnance long term illiquid assets and
shadow banks ﬁnance more liquid assets, while being sub-
ject to ﬁre sale losses and deposit runs. So greater asset
liquidity leads to more ﬁnancing by shadow banks. Our pa-
per makes a similar prediction but the explanation comes
from prospective liquidity of the asset itself rather than the
intermediary’s liability structure.
In the rest of the paper, we will formalize our argu-
ments. In Section 2 , we describe the basic framework and
the timing of decisions in a two-period model. In Section 3 ,
we study the ﬁrm’s borrowing without aggregate uncer-
tainty, and in Section 4 we add aggregate uncertainty. In
Section 5 we examine robustness and a few extensions and
then conclude in Section 6 .
2. The framework and model setup
Let us start with the simplest setup possible. Consider
an economy with two periods spanning three dates, t =
0 , 1 , 2 . At date 0, there is an asset, speciﬁcally a ﬁrm, which
is up for sale. At dates 1 and 2, the ﬁrm generates cash
ﬂows C 1 and C 2 , respectively.
2.1. Agents
The economy is populated with three groups of agents:
expert managers henceforth termed experts, ﬁnancial in-
termediaries whom we refer to as banks, and investors.
All agents are risk neutral and do not discount the future.
Therefore, the prevailing gross interest rate is 1. Experts
have the ability to produce cash ﬂows with the ﬁrm. How-
ever, they need to bid against each other for the ﬁrm at
date 0 (their initial bid also includes any amount required
for ﬁrm investments), as well as possibly at date 1 (see
shortly). Experts can bid with their wealth, supplemented
with any amount they can borrow. We will determine the
form of borrowing that allows an expert to raise the max-
imum possible at date 0. The winning expert manager will
become the incumbent expert manager of the ﬁrm.
Let θ be a measure of the ﬁrm’s stability , or the extent
to which the ﬁrm’s technology or the skills it needs are
unchanging. With probability 1 − θ during period 1, the in-
cumbent learns that her skills have become mismatched
with the technologies needed, so after producing period-1
cash ﬂows, she will lose her ability to produce cash ﬂows
in period 2. If this occurs, she will want to sell the ﬁrm
at date 1. We assume there are plenty of non-incumbent
experts around at date 1 who can run the ﬁrm, and will
therefore bid for it. Importantly, the event of the incum-
bent losing ability offers her a reason to increase the date-
1 resale value of the ﬁrm.
2.2. Payment enforcement
In general, a lender has two ways of getting repaid by
the incumbent manager on the date that a payment is due.
Deﬁne cash ﬂow pledgeability as the fraction of realized
cash ﬂow that can be veriﬁed by a court and therefore can
go directly to satisfy the lender’s claim. If γ2 is the pledge-
ability of cash ﬂows C 2 , the period-2 incumbent can com-
mit to repay up to γ2 C 2 of date-2 cash ﬂows to a lender.
This is the ﬁrst channel for repayment.
Second, just before the end of the period, the lender
gets the right to seize and auction the ﬁrm to the high-
est expert bidder if it has not been paid in full. This allows
it to extract repayment either by the threat of, or by actu-
ally, seizing and auctioning the ﬁrm. In this auction, both
other experts and the incumbent manager are allowed to
bid: we assume the incumbent can always bid using other
proxies, so contracts that ban her from participating in the
auction are infeasible. 4
4 If the incumbent could be prohibited from bidding, strategic defaults
would be ruled out and debt contracts would raise far more. More gen-
erally, credible threats by the incumbent to withdraw her human capital
from the project (as in Hart and Moore (1994) ) would result in similar
1278

===== PAGE 5 =====

D.W. Diamond, Y. Hu and R.G. Rajan Journal of Financial Economics 143 (2022) 1275–1294
2.3. More on cash ﬂow pledgeability
Cash ﬂow pledgeability is endogenous, and chosen by
the incumbent expert one period in advance. She can
raise pledgeability by adopting more informative account-
ing practices, hiring better accountants, setting up es-
crow accounts for cash ﬂows, simplifying corporate orga-
nizational structures and enhancing their transparency, or
putting in place better governance structures such as a
more expert and independent board (see Rajan (2012) ).
Essentially, the incumbent can credibly close off tunnels
which divert cash ﬂows generated by the ﬁrm. There are
also other ways she can change pledgeability. For instance,
the incumbent can invest in projects that require signif-
icant managerial inputs (or not make such investments)
and thus increase the rents future managers will capture
because of the need to provide them incentives for effort.
This too will affect the fraction of cash ﬂow that can be
pledged (see Gennaioli et al. (2015) ).
The range of feasible values for pledgeability γ2 ∈ [γ, ¯γ ]
, where 0 ≤ γ < ¯γ < 1 are determined by the econ-
omy’s institutions supporting corporate governance, both
operating within the ﬁrm (such as the availability of bet-
ter auditors and accounting norms) and through outside
institutions (such as laws protecting investors and the ef-
fectiveness of the judiciary). Linearity allows us to focus
on the extremes of the range, without loss of generality.
That is, we analyze only γ2 = γ or γ2 = ¯γ. To keep nota-
tion simple, we assume the interim cash ﬂows produced
during period 1 are not pledgeable, so that γ1 = 0 (this is
simply a normalization).
The process of improving pledgeability, for example, se-
lecting and installing a reputable auditor, takes time. The
incumbent manager has to invite applications, do due dili-
gence to screen out unsuitable applicants, interview the ﬁ-
nal candidates, and select one at the end. Moreover, there
could be some noise/errors in the process of improving
pledgeability. So we assume if the incumbent in period
1 exerts effort λ ∈
{λ, ¯λ}
in raising pledgeability, where
0 < λ < ¯λ < 1 , then Pr { γ2 = ¯γ} = λ. Note therefore that ef-
fort ¯λ results in a high probability ¯λ of high pledgeability
being realized one period later. The cost to the incumbent
of high effort is ε. Throughout the paper, the result will be
presented in the limiting case ε → 0 , as we focus primar-
ily on the beneﬁts to the incumbent of higher pledgeabil-
ity (which can be negative), rather than her direct cost. We
also assume that high effort is generally attractive so that
¯λ( 1 − θ) > λ (intuitively, this is because high pledgeability
can beneﬁt the incumbent with probability ( 1 − θ) ).
2.4. More on wealth and liquidity
We assume experts start with no wealth or net worth
at date 0, so that ω 0 = 0 (this is again just a normalization,
what matters is the need for outside funds). Then ω I
1 = C 1
is the incumbent’s personal wealth at date 1. Let ω E
1 be the
date-1 wealth of other experts who do not own any ﬁrm;
outcomes where the lender’s outside option (of selling the ﬁrm to oth-
ers) matters.
they do generate some wealth by working independently
over period 1. In the spirit of Gennaioli et al. (2015) , we
term this date-1 net worth of industry experts prospective
“liquidity ”. Prospective liquidity is exogenous to the model
and driven by the economic environment. It will be impor-
tant in what follows.
2.5. Financial contracts and intermediation
At date 0, each expert applies to one lender for funding.
We assume the ﬁnancial contract between the expert and
the lender (bank or investor) is a one-period debt contract:
the lender lends l 0 at date 0 in return for which the expert
promises to repay D 1 at date 1. We examine various forms
of one-period debt contracts, each with different enforce-
ment costs. We could allow for long-term debt, but it will
always be diluted and adds nothing if ¯λ is suﬃciently high,
as we have shown in Diamond et al. (2020) . In the absence
of aggregate uncertainty, one-period debt will turn out to
be optimal, without loss of generality.
With straight debt , only the repayment, D 1 is speci-
ﬁed. The lender has the right to seize the ﬁrm and auc-
tion it if not fully paid. Straight debt requires no addi-
tional information. In case of non-payment, only the trans-
fer to the lender of the right to auction the ﬁrm has to be
enforced.
Alternatively, the loan may contain a covenant: After
the incumbent chooses her pledgeability effort, a noisy
and veriﬁable binary signal φ ∈
{φH , φL }
about γ2 will be-
come available. If γ2 = γ, the signal is φ = φL . If γ2 = ¯γ,
the signal is φ = φH with probability 1 −e 1 and φ = φL
(a “type I” error) with probability e 1 < 0.5, so the sig-
nal is informative. When φ = φL , the covenant is deemed
tripped or violated. 5 The covenant in our model is rep-
resentative of a variety of real world covenants that are
violated when governance is deﬁcient. Covenants requir-
ing periodic audited ﬁnancial statements, requiring com-
pliance with certain accounting principles, or requiring
earnings to be a minimum ratio of debt, get tripped
when governance is of poor quality or cash ﬂow tunnel-
ing is excessive. Alternatively, covenants requiring mainte-
nance of a certain amount of liquid assets/working capi-
tal or covenants prohibiting mergers ensure that the rents
associated with managing the assets are limited. Such
covenants get tripped when pledgeability of future cash
ﬂows is likely to be low.
The loan contract may itself specify a new interest rate
based on the signal. We term this a performance pricing
loan contract. 6 Since we have one-period contracts, this
means the face value D 1 is automatically augmented to ˜ D 1
5 We examine Type II errors in the appendix, where the covenant trips
even if pledgeability is high: apart from making it harder to incentivize
pledgeability, it changes little qualitatively.
6 In practice, performance pricing contracts are based on a pricing
grid. The most commonly used trigger is the debt to EBITDA ratio (see
Asquith et al. (2005) ). For ease of comparison, we tie both the loan
covenant and the pricing grid to the same information, so we use the
term “covenant violation” both for performance pricing contracts as well
as bank loan contracts.
1279

===== PAGE 6 =====

D.W. Diamond, Y. Hu and R.G. Rajan Journal of Financial Economics 143 (2022) 1275–1294
upon a covenant violation, φ = φL . 7 We assume the lender
incurs a small veriﬁcation cost to establish the value of φ at
date 1. This cost is assumed negligible (to avoid unneces-
sary notation) and is used only to break ties between con-
tracts.
A bank loan covenant is also violated if φ = φL ; there is
no ﬁner information that the bank can contract on. How-
ever, the bank can verify the realization of φ earlier (say
at date 1/2). This allows the bank to intervene before the
signal becomes public. 8 We will assume that although van-
ishingly small, the bank’s early veriﬁcation cost at date 1/2
exceeds the veriﬁcation cost of the signal at date 1 (if used
in performance pricing). These costs will matter only in
breaking ties.
If a lending bank sees the covenant violated at date
1/2, it has two available actions at that time. First, it can
pay an additional cost ψ > 0 , monitor the incumbent, and
learn the realized pledgeability γ2 . We term this a mon-
itored loan. The information from monitoring is privately
observed by the bank and therefore is not veriﬁable. As
we will see later, monitoring is a powerful incentive de-
vice to increase pledgeability. However, its cost ψ exceeds
all of the previously mentioned costs. Second, the bank has
the authority to demand immediate repayment of D 1 or
propose a new face value. In case the bank demands im-
mediate repayment, the incumbent can try to borrow from
other banks to repay. If the incumbent cannot repay or re-
jects the proposed new face value, the bank can liquidate
and recover L . This recovery or early liquidation value is
not simply the sale of plant and equipment after a viola-
tion or loan default (it is not necessarily the Chapter VII
liquidation value in US bankruptcy). This early liquidation
value includes recovering part of the upfront loan amount
that has not been spent yet on investment. It encapsulates
the bank’s advantage of getting the signal early and being
able to act quickly to recover funds, before the borrower
goes seriously off track. We assume ¯γC 2 > L so that under
high pledgeability, the amount of pledgeable cash ﬂows ex-
ceeds the liquidation value.
2.6. Timing
The timing of events is described in Fig. 1 . After fund-
ing the project at date 0, the incumbent expert chooses her
pledgeability effort λ. The noisy and veriﬁable signal φ on
γ2 is realized. If the lender is a bank, it observes the signal
early. The bank may monitor the incumbent to learn real-
ized pledgeability and/or may demand repayment without
further monitoring. If not repaid, the bank may raise the
face value or liquidate. Subsequently, the incumbent’s abil-
ity in period 2 becomes known to all. If the project is not
liquidated, the cash ﬂows (if any) are produced. At date 1,
7 Asquith et al. (2005) describe interest increasing and interest decreas-
ing performance pricing debt contracts. Given we have only two out-
comes (covenant tripped or not), either face value can be thought of as
the base. In other words, we do not distinguish between the two forms
of debt pricing.
8 Dichev and Skinner (2002) and Nini et al. (2012) show that banks
intervene long before distress while Ivashina et al. (2016) show that arm’s
length investors like hedge funds enter the picture only much later.
the incumbent either pays the remaining debt due or en-
ters the auction. The period ends with potentially a new
incumbent in control.
3. Equilibrium without aggregate uncertainty
We ﬁrst analyze this simple model, then add aggregate
uncertainty. Since experts start with equal wealth, the ex-
pert who can borrow the most upfront will bid the most
at date 0, and becomes the initial incumbent. Our interest
is in determining what kind of debt this might be and how
much of it they will issue.
We fold backward from period 2. Any expert in place
at the beginning of period 2 can only commit to repay
D 2 = γ2 C 2 in period 2, where γ2 is the pledgeability set in
period 1. As a result, they can borrow up to γ2 C 2 when
bidding for control at date 1.
Turn now to the decisions made during period 1, the
most interesting part of the analysis. Since the pledgeabil-
ity of period 1 cash ﬂows is assumed to be zero, the repay-
ment of the debt contracted at date 0 is driven entirely by
the face value to be paid, D 1 , and the non-incumbent ex-
pert’s bid for the ﬁrm in a possible date-1 auction. This is
determined by ω E
1 , his wealth on date 1, as well as what he
can borrow against future cash ﬂows, which is determined
by γ2 . A rational expert’s date-1 bid for the ﬁrm will not
exceed the value of the future cash ﬂows, C 2 , so he will bid
B E
1 ( γ2 ) = min
{ω E
1 + γ2 C 2 , C 2
}
. Similarly, the maximum the
incumbent will bid is B I
1 ( γ2 ) = min
{ω I
1 + γ2 C 2 , C 2
}
. Com-
paring B I
1 ( γ2 ) and B E
1 ( γ2 ) , and using the assumption ω I
1 =
C 1 ≥ ω E
1 , we see that if the incumbent retains ability, she
can retain control by outbidding experts in any possible
date-1 auction. Since the continuation value of the ﬁrm,
C 2 , is identical for the incumbent and experts, the incum-
bent always wants to retain the ﬁrm if she retains ability.
To do so, she either pays the amount of debt outstanding
or outbids other experts. So she pays min
{
D 1 , B E
1 ( γ2 )
}
=
min
{
D 1 , ω E
1 + γ2 C 2 , C 2
}
.
Many of our results stem from this expression, so some
points are worth noting. First, so long as outside expert
bids are below C 2 , the greater the wealth of outside ex-
perts, that is, greater their prospective liquidity, ω E
1 , the
greater will be expert bids, and the greater will be the
debt face value that can be enforced. Similarly, the greater
the pledgeability γ2 chosen, the greater the date-1 bid,
and hence the greater the enforceability of debt payments.
However, no rational bidder will pay more than the resid-
ual value of the ﬁrm, C 2 . So when expert liquidity is suﬃ-
ciently high (that is, ω E
1 ≥ (1 − γ ) C 2 ), higher pledgeability
is no longer needed to enhance debt capacity; bidders have
enough wealth of their own to make a bid for full value,
without borrowing any more than the minimum pledge-
able cash ﬂows of the asset, γC 2 . In other words, high liq-
uidity can crowd out any need for more pledgeability in
enhancing borrowing capacity.
3.1. Straight debt
We ﬁrst analyze the (dis)incentives for choosing high
pledgeability created by straight debt without covenants.
1280

===== PAGE 7 =====

D.W. Diamond, Y. Hu and R.G. Rajan Journal of Financial Economics 143 (2022) 1275–1294
Fig. 1. Timeline and decisions.
Given D 1 , let V 1
(
D 1 , λ)
be the incumbent’s payoff when
she chooses λ :
V 1 ( D 1 , λ) = λθ [
C 2 −Min
[
B E
1 ( ¯γ ) , D 1
]]
+ λ( 1 − θ)
[
B E
1 ( ¯γ ) −Min
[
B E
1 ( ¯γ ) , D 1
]]
+ ( 1 − λ) θ [
C 2 −Min
[
B E
1 ( γ ) , D 1
]]
+ ( 1 − λ) (1 − θ)
[
B E
1 ( γ ) −Min
[
B E
1 ( γ ) , D 1
]]
− ε1 { λ= ¯λ} (1)
The ﬁrst term on the right hand side is the gross payoff
if she retains ability and is successful in raising pledgeabil-
ity, the second term is if she loses ability but has raised
pledgeability so she can sell at a high price, the third term
is if she retains ability but pledgeability turns out to be
low, and the fourth term is if she loses ability and the
ﬁrm has to be sold at a low price because pledgeability
is also low. The ﬁnal term is the direct cost of pledge-
ability effort if she sets it high. For any debt level D 1 ,
deﬁne /Delta11
(
D 1
)
= V 1
(
D 1 , ¯λ)
−V 1
(
D 1 , λ)
as the incumbent’s
beneﬁt from choosing high versus low effort. The level of
contracted debt shifts the beneﬁt, so /Delta11
(
D 1
)
(weakly) de-
creases in D 1 . The reason is straightforward. If the incum-
bent retains her ability, she has to pay more on the out-
standing debt if pledgeability is higher, and the higher the
outstanding debt, the more this is. Similarly, if she loses
her ability, she gets the residual value after the selling the
ﬁrm, and higher the outstanding debt, the less this is when
pledgeability is higher. So higher outstanding debt reduces
the incumbent’s incentive to raise pledgeability. Speciﬁ-
cally,
Lemma 3.1 . An incumbent’s net beneﬁt from
choosing high pledgeability is /Delta11
(
D 1
)
=
(¯λ − λ)
[θB E
1 ( γ ) + (1 − θ) B E
1 ( ¯γ ) −max
{
B E
1
(γ )
, min
{
D 1 , B E
1 ( ¯γ )
}}]
−
ε.
Fig. 2. Net payoff to high pledgeability.
The proof directly follows from the deﬁnition of
V 1
(
D 1 , λ)
above and is therefore omitted.  Let us deﬁne
D PayIC
1 ≡ θB E
1 ( γ ) + (1 − θ) B E
1 ( ¯γ ) − ε (¯λ−λ) as the maximum
debt at which the incumbent still has an incentive to exert
high pledgeability effort. Fig. 2 plots the net beneﬁt to the
incumbent at different levels of debt.
For D 1 ≤ B E
1
(γ )
, debt repayment is not increased by
higher pledgeability because the face value of outstand-
ing debt is low. Instead, higher pledgeability only increases
outside expert bids, which is beneﬁcial to the incum-
bent when she loses ability and sells the asset. The ex-
pected beneﬁts of higher pledgeability effort are /Delta11 ( D 1 ) = (¯λ − λ)
( 1 − θ)
[
B E
1 ( ¯γ ) −B E
1
(γ )]
− ε. When D 1 rises above
B E
1
(γ )
, the incumbent has to pay more to debt holders
when pledgeability is higher. So as the face value of debt
increases further, /Delta11 ( D 1 ) falls to zero at D 1 = D PayIC
1 and
then goes negative. When D 1 ≥ B E
1 ( ¯γ ) , the incumbent has
to pay the entire increment in sale price from increasing
pledgeability to debt holders when she loses ability. She
gets nothing from increasing pledgeability in this case. At
the same time, if she retains ability and pledgeability is
high she pays debt B E
1 ( ¯γ ) instead of B E
1
(γ )
. Hence the ex-
pected beneﬁt of higher pledgeability effort is negative and
equals −
(¯λ − λ)θ [
B E
1 ( ¯γ ) −B E
1
(γ )]
− ε.
1281

===== PAGE 8 =====

D.W. Diamond, Y. Hu and R.G. Rajan Journal of Financial Economics 143 (2022) 1275–1294
Finally, note that if liquidity is so high that ω E
1 ≥(
1 − γ )
C 2 , non-incumbent experts can pay the full price
of the asset C 2 even with low pledgeability. In that case,
both B E
1 ( ¯γ ) and B E
1
(γ )
equal C 2 , and /Delta11 ( D 1 ) = −ε for any
D 1 . Put differently, when liquidity crosses the threshold of (
1 − γ )
C 2 , higher pledgeability does not increase bids by
other experts.
Before moving on, note the role played by θ. In choos-
ing effort to increase pledgeability, the incumbent trades
off being forced to make higher possible repayments con-
ditional on retaining ability, when she “buys” the ﬁrm back
from the lender, against the higher possible resale value
when she sells the ﬁrm after losing ability. The higher the
stability θ, the more the disadvantage looms large relative
to the beneﬁt, and higher is the moral hazard associated
with raising pledgeability. This is why the maximum debt
consistent with high pledgeability effort, D PayIC
1 , falls in θ.
The level of debt determines whether the borrower will
choose high or low effort in pledgeability. For straight debt
this implies that one of two levels of debt will allow the
borrower to raise the most. The ﬁrst is straight debt at
the incentive compatible limit, which thus encourages high
pledgeability effort. Because pledgeability is induced with-
out outside governance action, we term this internal gov-
ernance debt . The amount the incumbent expert raises at
date 0 is l IG
0 ≡ ¯λD PayIC
1 +
(
1 − ¯λ)
B E
1 ( γ ) . Given high effort,
high pledgeability is realized with probability ¯λ, in which
case the incumbent repays D PayIC
1 . Otherwise, she repays
B E
1 ( γ ) .
The second possibility is for the expert to issue
covenant-free straight debt with D 1 = B E
1 ( ¯γ ) . Since this ex-
ceeds the incentive-compatible level, the expert chooses
low effort λ = λ. Given the high debt, the low average
pledgeability and low internal and external governance,
the debt is best labeled covenant-lite debt . The expert is
able to borrow l CL
0 = λB E
1 ( ¯γ ) + ( 1 − λ) B E
1 ( γ ) . Given low ef-
fort, high pledgeability is only realized with probability λ.
Note that internal governance straight debt and covenant-
lite straight debt are both straight debt, but set at different
levels so as to induce, or not induce, high pledgeability.
3.2. Performance-pricing debt versus straight debt
We now evaluate performance-pricing debt, where the
face value moves up from D 1 to ˜ D 1 when the covenant is
violated. It is without loss of generality to assume D 1 , ˜ D 1 ∈ [
B E
1 ( γ ) , B E
1 ( ¯γ )
]
. Payments below B E
1
(γ )
will never be de-
faulted on, whereas those above B E
1 ( ¯γ ) can never be re-
paid. With some slight abuse of notation, let V 1
(
D 1 , ˜ D 1 , λ)
be the incumbent’s payoff when she chooses effort λ, given
the debt payments schedule
{
D 1 , ˜ D 1
}
:
V 1
(
D 1 , ˜ D 1 , λ)
= λ[θC 2 + ( 1 − θ) B E
1 ( ¯γ ) − ( 1 −e 1 ) D 1 −e 1 ˜ D 1
]
+ ( 1 − λ) θ[
C 2 −B E
1 ( γ )
]
− ε1 { λ= ¯λ} . (2)
The terms on the right-hand side are straightforward. With
probability λ, the realized pledgeability is high. In this
case, with probability θ, the incumbent retains her abil-
ity and receive cash ﬂows C 2 in period 2. With probability
1 − θ, the incumbent loses her ability, in which case she
has to sell the asset at price B E
1 ( ¯γ ) . In both cases, she re-
pays D 1 to the lender if the covenant is not violated but
˜ D 1 if the covenant is triggered in error. The two events oc-
cur with probability 1 −e 1 and e 1 , respectively. The second
term is when the realized pledgeability is low γ2 = γ and
the covenant is violated for sure. In this case, regardless
of the new face value ˜ D 1 , if she keeps her ability the in-
cumbent repays only B E
1 ( γ ) and retains control of the ﬁrm.
If she loses her ability, however, the proceeds B E
1 ( γ ) from
selling the ﬁrm at a date-1 auction are insuﬃcient to re-
pay creditors, and the incumbent receives nothing. The last
term is the cost ε incurred whenever she chooses high ef-
fort λ = ¯λ.
High effort requires V 1
(
D 1 , ˜ D 1 , ¯λ)
≥V 1
(
D 1 , ˜ D 1 , λ)
, which
simpliﬁes to
( 1 −e 1 ) D 1 + e 1 ˜ D 1 ≤ D PayIC
1 . (3)
This IC constraint says the maximum expected performance
pricing payment consistent with the incumbent choosing
high pledgeability effort is the same as the incentive com-
patible maximum straight debt, D PayIC
1 . Let l P
0 be the max-
imum amount that an expert is able to raise with an in-
centive compatible perform pricing loan at date 0. Clearly,
for any
{
D 1 , ˜ D 1
}
s.t. D 1 , ˜ D 1 ∈
[
B E
1 ( γ ) , B E
1 ( ¯γ )
]
, the lender is
willing to lend
¯λ( 1 −e 1 ) D 1 + ¯λe 1 ˜ D 1 +
(
1 − ¯λ)
B E
1 ( γ ) ≤ l P
0 ≡ ¯λD PayIC
1
+
(
1 − ¯λ)
B E
1 ( γ ) ≡ l IG
0 . (4)
Therefore, straight internal governance debt leads to the
same expected repayment as performance pricing and also
saves on the tiny veriﬁcation cost incurred in the latter.
Proposition 3.1 . If there is no aggregate risk and B E
1 ( γ ) < C 2 ,
the incumbent can borrow more with the internal governance
level of straight debt than with performance-pricing debt.
The rationale is straightforward hence the proof is
omitted. Moreover, the restriction ¯λ( 1 − θ) > λ implies
high pledgeability effort is in general desirable for borrow-
ing, so that l IG
0 > l CL
0 , as long as B E
1 ( γ ) < C 2 . Of course, if the
level of industry liquidity gets suﬃciently high such that
B E
1 ( γ ) = C 2 , then D PayIC
1 = C 2 − ε
¯λ−λ. In this case covenant-
lite debt is best because l CL
0 = C 2 . It dominates internal
governance debt (because no costly pledgeability effort
is needed) and performance-pricing debt (as veriﬁcation
costs are not needed).
3.3. Bank early veriﬁcation of covenants with or without
monitoring
None of the loan contracts thus far requires non-
contractual intervention, nor is performance pricing domi-
nant, so nothing except payment default needs to be ver-
iﬁed. The loans could well have been held directly by in-
vestors. Can bank lending add value here?
The bank can intervene early and recover L . In addi-
tion, if the bank observes a covenant violation early, it
can monitor for more precise information before it de-
cides to intervene. Throughout this subsection, we assume
D 1 ≥ L without loss of generality: D 1 < L is always risk-
less so the initial bidder will, at minimum, set D 1 = L . Let
1282

===== PAGE 9 =====

D.W. Diamond, Y. Hu and R.G. Rajan Journal of Financial Economics 143 (2022) 1275–1294
¯π =
¯λe 1
¯λe 1 +(1 −¯λ) and π = λe 1
λe 1 +(1 −λ) be the posterior probabil-
ity of high pledgeability conditional on φ = φL under high
and low effort, respectively. Then deﬁne ¯l CV
1 = ¯πB E
1 ( ¯γ ) +
( 1 − ¯π) B E
1 ( γ ) as the maximum expected payments that
the bank can receive on date 1 upon a covenant viola-
tion, conditional on the incumbent manager having chosen
high effort λ = ¯λ. The subsequent analysis of what hap-
pens on covenant violation depends on the comparison be-
tween the liquidation value L , the experts’ bid under low
pledgeability B E
1 ( γ ) and ¯l CV
1 .
Case 1: L ≤ B E
1 ( γ )
The bank never liquidates since it is always better off
seizing and auctioning the ﬁrm at date 1 in case of non-
repayment. Early veriﬁcation is of no use. Therefore, the
maximum amount of borrowing with a bank-monitored
loan is (weakly) dominated by arm’s length straight debt
that induces internal governance.
Case 2: B E
1 ( γ ) < L ≤ ¯l CV
1 Upon covenant violation, the
ﬁrm is liquidated if and only if the bank knows that
pledgeability is low, which can only happen if it has mon-
itored. Consider the bank’s incentive to monitor. A bank
that monitors at date 1/2 has an information monopoly
(since the signal and γ2 become public only at date 1). It
will therefore set the renegotiated face value at ˜ D 1 = B E
1 ( ¯γ )
if it has learned γ2 = ¯γ and liquidate to receive L if γ2 = γ.
If the bank does not monitor and simply makes a take-it-
or-leave-it offer, then ˜ D 1 = B E
1 ( ¯γ ) . 9 Therefore, the beneﬁt
of monitoring comes from the bank’s option to liquidate
the project upon learning γ2 = γ. If M is the beneﬁt from
monitoring, M = ( 1 − ¯π)
(
L −B E
1 ( γ )
)
. The bank monit ors if
and only if M ≥ ψ.
Turn now to the borrower’s IC constraint in choosing
high effort. If the bank does not monitor (and therefore
does not liquidate) in equilibrium, the IC constraint is sim-
ilar to the case of performance-pricing debt, with ˜ D 1 =
B E
1 ( ¯γ ) , i.e., ( 1 −e 1 ) D 1 + e 1 B E
1 ( ¯γ ) ≤ D PayIC
1 . If the bank does
monitor, the incumbent’s payoff is
V M
1 ( D 1 , λ) = λ( 1 −e 1 )
[θC 2 + ( 1 − θ) B E
1 ( ¯γ ) −D 1
]
+ λe 1 θ [
C 2 −B E
1 ( ¯γ )
]
− ε1 { λ= ¯λ} . (5)
With probability λ( 1 −e 1 ) , there is no covenant violation.
If there is a covenant violation, there are two possibili-
ties. If the bank ﬁnds pledgeability has been set high but
the covenant has been erroneously tripped (with probabil-
ity λe 1 ), D 1 is augmented to ˜ D 1 = B E
1 ( ¯γ ) . With probabil-
ity 1 − λ, pledgeability is low, and the ﬁrm is liquidated
with the incumbent getting nothing. The incumbent’s IC
constraint requires V M
1
(
D 1 , ¯λ)
≥V M
1
(
D 1 , λ)
, which holds for
any D 1 . 10
Therefore, with bank monitoring, the face value of debt
is not limited by the need to provide the incumbent in-
centives. Intuitively, earlier the incumbent was tempted
9 In the subgame following the covenant violation and subsequent
monitoring, we assume the bank can match any offer that outsiders offer.
The winners-curse effect therefore allows the monitoring bank to charge
˜ D 1 = B E
1 ( ¯γ ) .
10 Note that if D 1 > B E
1 ( ¯γ ) , only B E
1 ( ¯γ ) is collectible, so we just need to
check the condition for all D 1 ≤ B E
1 ( ¯γ ) .
to lower pledgeability effort because it reduced debt re-
payment when pledgeability was low. Because low effort
causes a higher probability of covenant violation and the
bank monitors, detects, and liquidates when pledgeability
is low, the incumbent has no incentive to shirk pledgeabil-
ity effort now, and the face value of debt can be set at the
highest level.
Let l M
0 be the maximum initial borrowing under a
loan that will induce incumbent effort and bank monitor-
ing. Clearly, l M
0 = ¯λB E
1 ( ¯γ ) +
(
1 − ¯λ)
L −
[¯λe 1 +
(
1 − ¯λ)]ψ.
Monitoring is preferred if l M
0 > l IG
0 and M ≥ ψ. Other-
wise, the expert picks the IG level of debt, D 1 = D PayIC
1
without any covenant, and voluntarily chooses
high pledgeability effort. We can rewrite l M
0 −l IG
0 =
[¯λe 1 +
(
1 − ¯λ)][
( M − ψ ) + ¯λ
¯λe 1 +
(
1 −¯λ)
(
B E
1 ( ¯γ ) −D PayIC
1
)]
,
which is always positive as long as M ≥ ψ.
Case 3: B E
1 ( ¯γ ) ≥ L > ¯l CV
1
Upon the covenant violation here, the project is al-
ways liquidated unless the bank monitors and learns that
pledgeability is high. If the bank monitors, it sets ˜ D 1 =
B E
1 ( ¯γ ) if γ2 = ¯γ and liquidates to receive L if γ2 = γ. If it
doesn’t monitor, it gets L instead. In this case, the beneﬁt
of monitoring comes from avoiding liquidating the project
upon learning γ2 = ¯γ so that M = ¯π (
B E
1 ( ¯γ ) −L
)
. The bank
chooses to monitor if and only if M ≥ ψ.
Next, let us turn to the borrower’s IC constraint
in effort choice. Let superscript NM denote the case
where the bank does not monitor (and therefore
liquidates whenever the covenant is violated, even
if in error). The incumbent receives V NM
1
(
D 1 , λ)
=
λ( 1 −e 1 )
[θC 2 + ( 1 − θ) B E
1 ( ¯γ ) −D 1
]
− ε1 {λ= ¯λ}. The IC
constraint V NM
1
(
D 1 , ¯λ)
≥V NM
1
(
D 1 , λ)
is slack for any
D 1 for reasons similar to the one described earlier. If
the bank monitors, the incumbent receives V M
1
(
D 1 , λ)
as in the previous case. Once again, the IC con-
straint V M
1
(
D 1 , ¯λ)
≥V M
1
(
D 1 , λ)
is always slack for any
D 1 . Then l M
0 = ¯λB E
1 ( ¯γ ) +
(
1 − ¯λ)
L −
[¯λe 1 +
(
1 − ¯λ)]ψ
is unchanged. Moreover, l NM
0 = ¯λ( 1 −e 1 ) B E
1 ( ¯γ ) + [¯λe 1 +
(
1 − ¯λ)]
L . A simple comparison shows that
l NM
0 −l IG
0 = ¯λ
(
B E
1 ( ¯γ ) −D PayIC
1
)
+
[¯λe 1 +
(
1 − ¯λ)](
L − ¯l CV
1
)
,
which is greater than zero because L > ¯l CV
1 . Moreover, it is
easily shown that l M
0 > l NM
0 if and only if M > ψ.
3.4. Equilibrium outcome
Combining the results, we get the following, based
roughly in descending order of liquidity ω E
1 :
Proposition 3.2 .
(i) If B E
1 ( γ ) = C 2 , covenant-lite debt D 1 = B E
1 ( ¯γ ) is chosen,
which induces low effort.
(ii) If B E
1 ( γ ) ∈ [ L, C 2 ) , internal-governance debt D 1 = D PayIC
1 is
chosen, which induces high effort.
(iii) If B E
1 ( γ ) < L ≤ ¯l CV
1 , bank debt D 1 = B E
1 ( ¯γ ) with monitor-
ing is chosen if and only if ψ ≤ ( 1 − ¯π)
(
L −B E
1 ( γ )
)
. Oth-
erwise, internal-governance debt D 1 = D PayIC
1 is chosen. In
either case, high effort is chosen.
1283

===== PAGE 10 =====

D.W. Diamond, Y. Hu and R.G. Rajan Journal of Financial Economics 143 (2022) 1275–1294
Fig. 3. Equilibrium without aggregate risk.
(iv) If B E
1 ( γ ) ≤ ¯l CV
1 < L , bank debt D 1 = B E
1 ( ¯γ ) is chosen. The
bank monitors if and only if ψ ≤ ¯π (
B E
1 ( ¯γ ) −L
)
. Other-
wise, the bank does not monitor and it liquidates follow-
ing a covenant violation. In either case, high effort is cho-
sen.
Fig. 3 illustrates the equilibrium results as a function of
industry liquidity ω E
1 and the bank monitoring cost, ψ. We
will discuss it shortly.
3.5. Discussion
Our analysis highlights the difference between external
sources of corporate governance and internal sources of
governance, and how this affects the source of ﬁnancing.
We identify two sources of external pressure on the ﬁrm to
repay: the threat to liquidate the project (or halt the fur-
ther funding of project investment), which will incentivize
the expert to enhance her effort to raise pledgeability, and
the threat to take away the going-concern ﬁrm and sell it
(a form of U.S. Chapter 11), which is augmented by outside
expert liquidity. In many situations, these external threats
enhance repayment most when the incumbent is also in-
centivized to choose higher pledgeability.
Of course, if outside experts had plenty of liquidity and
could always bid full value, the threat to sell to them
would be suﬃcient to enforce full repayment. Pledgeabil-
ity matters when experts are insuﬃciently liquid to bid full
value.
Traditional models of agency and debt tend to focus on
project choice. Since different projects result in different
“pies,” a differential sharing of those pies with ﬁnanciers
is needed to ensure the incumbent manager chooses the
biggest pie. The design of ﬁnancing contracts is about in-
centivizing the right choice. In our paper, we essentially
have a single pie. The key question is how much internal,
and how much external, governance is brought about by
the speciﬁc debt contract and by the environment. That
determines how the pie is shared, and the amount ﬁ-
nanciers will put up initially for their share.
The key external variables are the early recov-
ery/liquidation value, L, and expert liquidity, ω E
1 , which en-
hances going-concern sale value. It is essential that the liq-
uidation value be something the bank can obtain without
the borrower’s co-operation; only then can seizing it be a
strong punishment for non-cooperation. It will certainly be
high if the ﬁrm’s assets sold piecemeal (as opposed to as
a going concern) have strong secondary market values, but
it is also likely to be high when investment in a project is
drawn out and the bank can halt further disbursement of
cash. As we have seen, the threat of liquidation works best
when the future going-concern value with low pledgeabil-
ity (that is, B E
1 ( γ ) ) is likely to be low. This is when ex-
pert liquidity ω E
1 is low (see Fig. 3 ). In these circumstances,
bank ﬁnancing with monitoring dominates.
Two points are worth noting. First, the liquidation value
can be much lower than the contracted debt, and can
nevertheless be useful in ensuring it is paid back, by en-
suring the incumbent enhances the appropriable going-
concern value of the ﬁrm through pledgeability effort (see
Kermani and Ma (2020) for related evidence). Second, a
bank loan with a covenant also protects the borrower from
the bank when the covenant is not violated, thus im-
proving incentives. If the bank always had the right to
raise rates, the incumbent would never set pledgeability
high.
However, as liquidity increases and the ﬁrm’s going
concern value, B E
1 ( γ ) , exceeds L , the bank’s threat to liq-
uidate is no longer credible, and bank ﬁnance is no longer
attractive. Interestingly, the upfront debt the ﬁrm can issue
may actually fall with higher prospective outside expert
liquidity ω E
1 as the ﬁrm transitions from bank ﬁnance to
internal governance: since the ﬁrm has to be incentivized
to boost pledgeability without liquidation threats, external
debt has to be set at D PayIC
1 rather than at B E
1 ( ¯γ ) . Therefore,
the inability to get the bank to monitor has consequences
for borrowing capacity. Of course, as expert liquidity in-
creases still further, ﬁrst D PayIC
1 increases, and eventually
expert liquidity is so high that there is no need to incen-
tivize pledgeability; debt can be set as high as C 2 and be
covenant-lite.
When we have no aggregate risk, performance pric-
ing, which allows more contractual ﬂexibility than straight
debt, cannot improve over incentive compatible straight
debt. The reason is interesting. Performance pricing allows
the face value of debt to be raised from the pre-contracted
value D 1 , conditional on covenant violation. There are two
reasons the covenant is violated. First, pledgeability could
be low, γ. It might seem that raising face value in this
situation should penalize the incumbent, and improve her
1284

===== PAGE 11 =====

D.W. Diamond, Y. Hu and R.G. Rajan Journal of Financial Economics 143 (2022) 1275–1294
incentives to choose high pledgeability. However, so long
as D 1 ≥ B E
1 ( γ ) , which it always is, raising the face value
further does nothing for payment recovery. Put differently,
low pledgeability itself defuses the possible penalty im-
posed by performance pricing. Of course, the second situ-
ation where the covenant is violated is when it is violated
in error, when pledgeability is actually high, ¯γ. However,
while the face value can be raised from D 1 up to a col-
lectible B E
1 ( ¯γ ) , the higher face value acts as a disincentive
to higher pledgeability effort (because it is collected when
high pledgeability is realized). This is why the performance
pricing IC constraint is ( 1 −e 1 ) D 1 + e 1 B E
1 ( ¯γ ) ≤ D PayIC
1 . Per-
formance pricing cannot do better than setting the straight
debt face value at D PayIC
1 and leaving it unchanged on
covenant violation. In sum, performance pricing cannot
incentivize pledgeability more easily because the penalty
needs to be inﬂicted when the incumbent shirks effort, but
this is precisely when the penalty is unenforceable. Aggre-
gate uncertainty will alter this conclusion.
Finally, consider the role played by θ, the stability of
the ﬁrm’s technology. If θ = 1 , the incumbent never loses
ability and never has to sell the ﬁrm. Consequently, higher
pledgeability always hurts her by strengthening external
creditor claims. The only way to get her to raise pledge-
ability is for the bank to threaten to liquidate her if she
does not. Otherwise, she can get ﬁnancing only to the ex-
tent available through external liquidity (up to B E
1 ( γ ) ). So
monitored bank ﬁnance or covenant-lite debt are her only
two options. A wider range of ﬁnancing options open up
only when θ < 1 and the incumbent can be incentivized
to raise pledgeability. Nevertheless, the availability of un-
monitored ﬁnance decreases in θ because of the greater
diﬃculty in incentivizing pledgeability, while the availabil-
ity of bank ﬁnance does not, suggesting that bank ﬁnance
dominates arm’s length ﬁnance when moral hazard over
pledgeability is high.
Another interpretation of θ is it is the extent to which
the ﬁrm can ﬁnance new projects from internal sources. A
high θ thus is most consistent with a mature ﬁrm in a sta-
ble industry with high free cash ﬂows and few investment
opportunities, a class of ﬁrms that Jensen (1986, 1989) ar-
gues is prone to high agency costs and little internal gov-
ernance.
We will examine the empirical evidence in the next
section. Note however that performance pricing is domi-
nated in this section because of small contracting costs of
changing the face value. Let us now add uncertainty to the
model to see if that continues to be the case.
4. Equilibrium with aggregate uncertainty
We will now show that with aggregate uncertainty,
performance-pricing debt can be preferred to straight debt
when the state cannot be contracted on, even though
the covenant violation (based on ﬁrm-speciﬁc choices and
outcomes) is prima-facie uncorrelated with the aggre-
gate state. Intuitively, through implicit state-contingency,
performance-pricing debt can provide better incentives for
high pledgeability than straight debt.
Let us introduce the following modiﬁcations to the
model presented in the previous section. With probabil-
Fig. 4. States of nature.
ity q , let the economy be in the good prosperous state G
at date 1 where the ﬁrm generates C 1 and industry liq-
uidity is high. With probability 1 −q , it is in the bad dis-
tressed state B , where the ﬁrm fails to generate any cash
ﬂow and industry liquidity is low. The aggregate state is re-
alized after pledgeability effort is chosen, pledgeability re-
alized, and the covenant tripped (or not). Fig. 4 illustrates
the evolution of the state of nature. Note that for simplic-
ity, the cash ﬂow at date 2 is assumed independent of the
state at date 1.
Let ω I,s 1
1 be the incumbent’s wealth in state s 1 at date 1,
so ω I,G
1 = C 1 and ω I,B
1 = 0 . Let ω E,s 1
1 be the state- s 1 wealth
of other experts who do not own any ﬁrm. The wealth of
these non-incumbent experts (who work elsewhere when
not running a ﬁrm) is augmented when the economy is in
state G, so ω E,G
1 > ω E,B
1 . As earlier, we assume ω I,G
1 = C 1 >
ω E,G
1 , and for simplicity that ω E,B
1 = ω I,B
1 = 0 , so that the in-
cumbent manager always has (weakly) more wealth than
industry experts. Finally, to focus on the largest number of
relevant cases, we assume the difference in liquidity be-
tween the two future states is large enough that regard-
less of pledgeability, possible repayment is higher in future
state G than in future state B, that is,
Assumption 1 . B E,G
1
(γ )
≡ ω E,G
1 + γC 2 > ¯γC 2 ≡ B E,B
1 ( ¯γ )
Some of the cases described in Proposition 4.2 below
will disappear if Assumption 1 is violated.
4.1. Internal-governance and covenant-lite debt
Let us ﬁrst study straight debt again. In the previ-
ous section with no uncertainty, we determined /Delta11
(
D 1
)
,
the incumbent’s beneﬁt from choosing high versus low
pledgeability effort for any given D 1 . Corresponding to
the parameters of each state, we can determine D B,PayIC
1
and D G,PayIC
1 , the respective incentive compatible levels
of debt if state B or state G were to occur with cer-
tainty. With aggregate uncertainty, the risk-neutral incum-
bent will choose high pledgeability effort if and only if
q /Delta1G
1
(
D 1
)
+ (1 −q )/Delta1B
1
(
D 1
)
≥ 0 , where q is the probability
of state G. Let D IC
1 be the value of D 1 that makes this
weak inequality equal zero. Since both /Delta1G
1 and /Delta1B
1 are
weakly decreasing in D 1 , it must be that D IC
1 , the thresh-
old of debt below which high effort is incentivized when
1285

===== PAGE 12 =====

D.W. Diamond, Y. Hu and R.G. Rajan Journal of Financial Economics 143 (2022) 1275–1294
the incumbent has to choose effort before the state occurs,
lies between D B,PayIC
1 and D G,PayIC
1 . 11 Following Lemma 3.1 ,
we deﬁne /Delta1
max ,s 1
1 =
(¯λ−λ)(1 −θ)
[
B
E,s 1
1 ( ¯γ ) −B
E,s 1
1 ( γ )
]
−ε and /Delta1
min ,s 1
1 =
(¯λ−λ)θ
[
B
E,s 1
1 ( γ ) −B
E,s 1
1 ( ¯γ )
]
−ε as the maximum and minimum
of /Delta1s 1
1 ( D 1 ) in state s 1 ∈ { G, B } . These are the levels of ﬂat
regions on the left and right of Fig. 2 , respectively.
Lemma 4.1 .
(i) If
q /Delta1max ,G
1 + ( 1 −q ) /Delta1min ,B
1 ≥ 0 , (6)
then
D IC
1 ≥ B E,G
1
(γ )
. (7)
Otherwise,
D IC
1 < B E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) . (8)
(ii)
l IG
0 = q
[¯λD IC
1 +
(
1 − ¯λ)
min
{
D IC
1 , B E,G
1
(γ )}]
+ ( 1 −q )
[¯λmin
{
D IC
1 , B E,B
1 ( ¯γ )
}
+
(
1 − ¯λ)
B E,B
1
(γ )]
l CL
0 = q
[λB E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) + ( 1 − λ) B E,G
1
(γ )]
+ ( 1 −q )
[λB E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) + ( 1 − λ) B E,B
1
(γ )]
.
If q is suﬃciently high, there exists a unique ω ∗ such that
l IG
0 < l CL
0 if and only if ω E,G
0 > ω ∗.
Proof: See appendix.
It is useful to understand the conditions under which
(6) in Lemma 4.1 is more likely to hold. In particular, it
holds when the degree of moral hazard θ is low, and the
expected value of raising pledgeability in the G state itself
is high. In that case, the face value of incentive-compatible
debt is higher than B E,G
1
(γ )
because there is enough in-
centive to raise pledgeability emanating from the G state.
Conversely, as liquidity in the G state, ω E,G
1 , rises, the value
to raising pledgeability emanating from the G state falls. 12
If so, D IC
1 has to be below B E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) so that some of the in-
centive to raise pledgeability also comes from the B state.
As we will see shortly, performance pricing will be helpful
in this situation of lower face value.
An extreme case is if ω E,G
1 ≥
(
1 − γ )
C 2 , so that higher
pledgeability does not enhance expert bids in the G state
because the expert has enough wealth to bid full value
with pledgeability even at γ. All the incentive to raise
pledgeability then comes from state B. So to incentivize
high effort, the promised payment cannot exceed D IC
1 =
D B,PayIC
1 . If the probability of the good state q is suﬃciently
high (as shown in the appendix), it may be best to raise
funds without incentivizing pledgeability, as covenant-lite
debt. Even in the general case where ω E,G
1 <
(
1 − γ )
C 2 , if
11 Let D IC
1 be the highest value if there are multiple solutions to the
equation q /Delta1G
1
(
D 1
)
+ (1 −q )/Delta1B
1
(
D 1
)
= 0 , which only happens in a zero-
measure parametric space.
12 The left-hand side simpliﬁes to q
{
( 1 − θ)
(
¯γ − γ )
C 2 − ε
¯λ−λ
}
when
ω E,G
1 < ( 1 − ¯γ ) C 2 . But when ω E,G
1 ≥ ( 1 − ¯γ ) C 2 , B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) is capped at C 2 , so
it becomes q
{
( 1 − θ)
[(
1 − γ )
C 2 − ω E,G
1
]
− ε
¯λ−λ
}
which falls in ω E,G
1 until
ω E,G
1 ≥
(
1 − γ )
C 2 , when it is −q ε
¯λ−λ < 0 .
B E,G
1 ( γ ) is much larger than D IC
1 (either because liquidity
in the G state is high or the moral hazard associated with
pledgeability is high so that D IC
1 is low), the incumbent
could commit to more repayment (and thus raise more) by
setting D 1 = B E,G
1 ( γ ) and disincentivizing effort.
The broader point is that the prospect of a highly liq-
uid future state not only makes feasible greater promised
straight debt payments, but these high promised pay-
ments also eliminate incentives to enhance pledgeabil-
ity, the covenant-lite situation. To restore those incentives,
debt may have to be set so low that funds raised are
greatly reduced, something the incumbent will not want
to do if she needs to compete to buy the ﬁrm at date 0.
This situation where low-pledgeability covenant-lite loans
are attractive can occur even if the probability of the low
state is signiﬁcant, and even if the direct cost ε of enhanc-
ing pledgeability is zero.
4.2. Performance-pricing debt
Once again, let
{
D 1 , ˜ D 1
}
be the performance-pricing
debt contract. We prove in Lemma A.1 in the appendix that
it is without loss of generality to assume ˜ D 1 = B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) fol-
lowing a covenant violation. Intuitively, ˜ D 1 = B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) pro-
vides the harshest punishment for low effort choice under
performance-pricing debt.
Lemma 4.2 . Under Assumption 1 and e 1 < ¯e 1 , there exists a
unique D P
1 such that the incumbent chooses high effort if and
only if D 1 ≤ D P
1 . Under
{
D 1 , ˜ D 1
}
=
{
D P
1 , B E,G
1 ( ¯γ )
}
, the incum-
bent can raise
l P
0 = ¯λ[
qD G,PayIC
1 + ( 1 −q ) D B,PayIC
1
]
+
(
1 − ¯λ)[
qB E,G
1
(γ )
+ ( 1 −q ) B E,B
1
(γ )]
. (9)
The expressions for ¯e 1 is contained in the appendix. Inter-
estingly, and unlike the case without the aggregate risk,
performance pricing can do strictly better than internal-
governance debt when there is aggregate uncertainty.
Summarizing the analysis above, we get the following re-
sult.
Proposition 4.1 . Under aggregate uncertainty, if condition
(6) in Lemma 4.1 holds, (i) l IG
0 = l P
0 . Internal-governance
debt raises more than performance-pricing debt (by the
amount of the enforcement cost). Otherwise, (ii) l P
0 > l IG
0
so that performance-pricing debt raises more than internal-
governance debt. Finally, (iii) l P
0 > l CL
0 always holds as long as
ω E,B
1 <
(
1 − γ )
C 2 .
Recall that if (6) holds, Lemma 4.1 states that the incen-
tive compatible level of straight debt, D IC
1 , is higher than
B E,G
1
(γ )
. Performance pricing allows the face value to be
raised conditional on covenant violation. In the B state, D IC
1
is already above the possible enforceable values, B E,B
1 ( ¯γ )
and B E,B
1
(γ )
, so raising the face value any further would
not alter the amount the lender could recover in that state.
This then means that from the perspective of incentivizing
effort, the two states effectively reduce to the one G state.
However, we know from our analysis in the previous sec-
tion that performance pricing cannot improve over straight
debt in the G state if D IC
1 > B E,G
1
(γ )
.
1286

===== PAGE 13 =====

D.W. Diamond, Y. Hu and R.G. Rajan Journal of Financial Economics 143 (2022) 1275–1294
If (6) does not hold, then Lemma 4.1 states that the
incentive compatible level of straight debt, D IC
1 , is lower
than B E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) . In this case, performance pricing can indeed
improve over straight debt. In particular, if the covenant
is violated, the face value of debt can be raised in the
G state to B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) so that a higher payment can be col-
lected. 13 This higher payment penalizes the incumbent if
low pledgeability is realized, which improves her incentive
for high pledgeability effort.
Of course, performance pricing can also be triggered in
error when the realized pledgeability is actually high. We
know, however, that any disincentive effect of the higher
repayment triggered by covenant error can be offset by
setting the payment commensurately lower when pledge-
ability is high and there is no covenant error. In sum, when
the incentive compatible face value for straight debt is low
as in Proposition 4.1 (ii), it can be improved upon by rais-
ing the face value and collecting more when low pledge-
ability is realized in the G state. Not only does this directly
increase repayment to the lender, it improves the incum-
bent’s effort incentives, and thereby further enhances the
incentive compatible level of baseline debt.
Finally, Proposition 4.1 (iii) suggests performance-
pricing debt outraises covenant-lite debt so long as higher
pledgeability improves recovery in some state. We have
l P
0 −l CL
0 =
[¯λ( 1 − θ) − λ][
q
(
B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) −B E,G
1
(γ ))
+ ( 1 −q )
(
B E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) −B E,B
1
(γ ))]
− ¯λ ε
¯λ − λ
> 0 ,
(10)
which always holds when ¯λ( 1 − θ) > λ, ω E,B
1 <
(
1 − γ )
C 2 ,
and ε is small.
4.3. Bank monitoring
With some abuse of notation, let us deﬁne
¯l CV
1 = ¯π
[
qB E,G
1 ( ¯γ )+ ( 1 −q ) B E,B
1 ( ¯γ )
]
+ ( 1 − ¯π)
[
qB E,G
1 ( γ )+ ( 1 −q ) B E,B
1 ( γ )
]
. This is
the maximum expected payment that the bank can receive
on date 1 upon a covenant violation, conditional on the
incumbent manager having chosen high effort λ = ¯λ.
The subsequent analysis depends on the comparison
between the liquidation value L , the minimum expected
continuation value when realized pledgeability is low,
l 1 = qB E,G
1 ( γ ) + ( 1 −q ) B E,B
1 ( γ ) , and ¯l CV
1 . Again, we assume
D 1 ≥ L and that L < qB E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) + ( 1 −q ) B E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) ; otherwise,
the ﬁrm will always be liquidated. Since the solution
with aggregate risk is qualitatively similar to that with no
aggregate risk, we will only sketch the analysis. The cases
are ordered according to decreasing state G liquidity, ω E,G
1 .
Recall that beyond some level of liquidity, performance
pricing debt will dominate internal governance debt as an
alternative to bank debt.
Case 1: L ≤ l 1 It does not make sense to liquidate since
continuation values are always higher. Therefore, the maxi-
mum amount of borrowing under a loan that induces bank
monitoring is always (weakly) dominated by straight debt
13 If the covenant is correctly tripped, B E,G
1
(γ )
can be repaid. If triggered
by the type-I error, the actual payment is B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) .
or performance-pricing debt, whichever raises more fol-
lowing Proposition 4.1 .
Case 2: l 1 < L ≤ ¯l CV
1
Upon the covenant violation, the project is liquidated if
and only if the bank knows that pledgeability is low, which
can only happen if it has monitored. As earlier, the beneﬁt
of monitoring, M, is ( 1 − ¯π) ( L −l 1 ) . The bank chooses to
monitor if and only if M ≥ ψ.
Next, let us turn to the borrower’s IC constraint in ef-
fort choice. If the bank does not monitor, the IC constraint
is identical to the IC constraint in case of performance-
pricing debt described in Lemma 4.2 . So there will be a
maximum incentive compatible D P
1 where D P
1 < B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) . If
the bank does monitor, the incumbent’s IC constraint is al-
ways satisﬁed for any D 1 ≤ B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) . This is because after
monitoring, the bank will liquidate the project whenever
realized pledgeability is low, in which case the incumbent
receives nothing. There is no advantage to her to lower
pledgeability.
Case 3: L > ¯l CV
1
Upon covenant violation, the project is always liqui-
dated unless the bank monitors and learns that pledge-
ability is high. Once again, if the bank monitors, it sets
˜ D 1 = B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) if it has learned γ2 = ¯γ and liquidates if
γ2 = γ. The beneﬁt of monitoring comes from the op-
tion to avoid liquidating the project upon learning γ2 =
¯γ so that M = ¯π [
qB E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) + ( 1 −q ) B E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) −L
]
. The bank
chooses to monitor if and only if M ≥ ψ.
It is easily shown that the incumbent’s IC constraint
V 1
(
D 1 , ¯λ)
≥V 1
(
D 1 , λ)
is always satisﬁed for any D 1 , regard-
less of whether the bank chooses to monitor (M) or not
(NM) - any liquidation on covenant violation is a powerful
threat. Also, l NM
0 > max
{
l P
0 , l IG
0
}
as long as L > ¯l CV
1 . Finally,
as earlier, l M
0 > l NM
0 if and only if M > ψ.
4.4. Equilibrium outcomes
Combining the results in the previous three cases, we
have
Proposition 4.2 .
(i) If (6) in Lemma 4.1 holds, internal governance debt with
D 1 = D IC
1 is preferred to performance-pricing debt, else
performance-pricing debt
{
D P
1 , B E,G
1 ( γ )
}
is chosen.
(ii) If L < l 1 , the form of debt found superior in (i) is preferred.
(iii) If L ∈
[
l 1 , ¯l CV
1
]
, a bank monitored loan D 1 = B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) is
chosen if and only if ψ ≤ ( 1 − ¯π) ( L −l 1 ) . Otherwise, the
form of debt found superior in (i) is preferred.
(iv) If L ≥ ¯l CV
1 , a bank monitored loan D 1 = B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) is cho-
sen if and only if ψ ≤ ¯π [
qB E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) + ( 1 −q ) B E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) −L
]
.
Otherwise, D 1 = B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) , and the bank liquidates the
project following a covenant violation.
Fig. 5 offers a graphic illustration of the equilibrium
described in Proposition 4.2 , where we have implicitly
assumed the level of ω E,G
1 that ensures condition (6) is
satisﬁed with equality is above the level that satisﬁes
L = l 1 . Otherwise, the dashed red line shifts towards the
left, which further squeezes the region where internal-
governance debt can be optimal. The qualitative features
1287

===== PAGE 14 =====

D.W. Diamond, Y. Hu and R.G. Rajan Journal of Financial Economics 143 (2022) 1275–1294
Fig. 5. Equilibrium with aggregate risk.
are unchanged from those in Fig. 3 except that covenant-
lite loan is always dominated by performance-pricing loan,
as long as the liquidity in state B remains suﬃciently low.
Of course, if both ω E,G
1 and ω E,B
1 rise above
(
1 − γ )
C 2 (not
illustrated in Fig. 5 ) so that pledgeability is not needed in
either state, then covenant-lite debt always dominates all
the other options.
4.5. Discussion and empirical evidence
The purpose of examining aggregate risk combined
with debt contracts was to illustrate the rationale for per-
formance pricing. Note that the probability of the realiza-
tion of various aggregate states is orthogonal to the prob-
ability of the covenant tripping: the latter is tied only
to the incumbent’s decision on pledgeability. Nevertheless,
we still get performance pricing as a dominant contract.
The rationale is interesting. The need to give the incum-
bent incentives to raise pledgeability in the presence of ag-
gregate uncertainty forces down the face value of the in-
centive compatible debt contract, and creates room for the
interest rate to be credibly raised conditional on genuine
covenant violation. This allows the face value increase to
punish the shirking borrower. Note that if state-contingent
face values are hard to contract on, performance pricing
brings in state contingency through the back door because
an expert’s bid, and therefore repayment enforcement, is
state contingent. Allowing loan pricing contingent on the
ﬁrm-speciﬁc news about pledgeability effort can therefore
strictly improve the available set of contracts. Of course,
if covenant violations and the state were correlated, this
would only strengthen the result.
There is an extensive literature on covenants (see, for
example, Ivashina et al. (2016) on covenants in public
debt contracts, Bradley and Roberts (2015) in private debt
contracts, and Kaplan and Stromberg (2003) in VC con-
tracts). There are various categorizations of covenants.
Christensen and Nikolaev (2012) term covenants that limit
leverage, or require a minimum amount of equity, “capital”
covenants. Performance covenants, on the other hand, are
formulated directly in terms of cash ﬂows or in combina-
tion with balance sheet data (such as a debt to EBITDA ra-
tio). Performance covenants align well with the covenant
in our paper. Since γt C t is the veriﬁable cash ﬂow, the
covenant will be tripped in practice whenever the en-
trepreneur diverts cash ﬂows or puts in place weak gov-
ernance, so veriﬁable cash ﬂows are low. Christensen and
Nikolaev argue that performance covenants are the ones
that are associated with contract renegotiation.
In a more extensive study of the conditions under
which contracts are renegotiated, Nikolaev (2018) ﬁnds a
positive correlation between the audit premium and the
frequency of renegotiation. 14 The audit premium is a proxy
for low pledgeability, and to the extent that covenant vi-
olations are necessary for creditor-initiated renegotiations,
the positive correlation between audit fees and renegoti-
ation is consistent with the structure of our model. In-
terestingly, Nikolaev (2018) ﬁnds that performance pricing
contracts are signiﬁcantly less likely to be renegotiated;
the performance pricing grid substitutes for renegotiation.
Asquith et al. (2005) also provide suggestive evidence that
performance pricing contracts are more arm’s length con-
tracts meant to reduce the costs of monitoring and renego-
tiation; performance pricing contracts are associated with
larger loan syndicates rather than single banks (also see
Saavedra (2018) .
Turning to predictions, we ﬁnd a role for performance
pricing contracts (relative to straight debt contracts or
bank debt contracts with extensive covenants) when there
is aggregate risk and prospective liquidity is high so that
the baseline incentive compatible level of debt is low. Rel-
ative to internal governance debt (straight debt with no
covenants), our model suggest performance pricing is more
likely when moral hazard is high. Asquith et al. (2005) ﬁnd
that performance pricing contracts are positively associ-
ated with their proxy for moral hazard, whether the con-
tract is predicted to contain material restrictions on the
borrower’s ﬁnancing and investment behavior.
The covenant in our model is also representative of
what Ivashina et al. (2016) call maintenance covenants (re-
quiring say a minimum amount of working capital) as well
as covenants requiring compliance (such as regular audited
statements) and covenants limiting mergers and acquisi-
tions (so as to limit entrenching investment). Entrenching
investment, which requires substantial management input
in the future, and thus entrenches future managerial rents,
reduces future pledgeability. Covenants that limit capital
14 The audit premium is the unexplained variation in a linear regression
of the natural log of audit fees on a set of their determinants. It is an
accounting measure of low transparency and information quality about a
ﬁrm’s performance
1288

===== PAGE 15 =====

D.W. Diamond, Y. Hu and R.G. Rajan Journal of Financial Economics 143 (2022) 1275–1294
expenditure thus discourage managerial actions lowering
pledgeability. More research on when such covenants are
used is warranted.
5. Extensions
It is useful to relax assumptions/extend the model in
some directions.
5.1. Covenant tightness
Suppose the type-I error of the covenant violation e 1 is
chosen by the bank. It incurs some convex cost κ( 1 −e 1 )
that satisﬁes, κ( 1 − ¯e ) = 0 , κ′ > 0 and κ′′ > 0 , where ¯e can
be thought as the maximum probability of a type-I error. A
higher e 1 corresponds to a slacker covenant. What would
the optimal choice be? Consider the case without aggre-
gate uncertainty, the uncertainty case is qualitatively simi-
lar.
If liquidity is suﬃciently high such that B E
1
(γ )
≥ L , e 1 =
¯e is chosen. This is because early liquidation never oc-
curs. This corresponds to the loosest covenant, when bank
debt is equivalent to arm’s length debt (this is an alter-
native interpretation of covenant-lite). Recall that if the
bank chooses to monitor upon a covenant violation, the
amount that the incumbent can raise is l M
0 = ¯λB E
1 ( ¯γ ) + (
1 − ¯λ)
L −
[¯λe 1 +
(
1 − ¯λ)]ψ. Clearly, a lower e 1 reduces
the cost the bank incurs in unnecessary monitoring, so
e 1 is chosen to maximize −¯λe 1 ψ − κ( 1 −e 1 ) . If the bank
always liquidates the project following a covenant viola-
tion, the amount that the incumbent can raise is l NM
0 =
¯λ( 1 −e 1 ) B E
1 ( ¯γ ) +
[¯λe 1 +
(
1 − ¯λ)]
L . Clearly, a lower e 1 re-
duces the chances the bank liquidates ineﬃciently, so e 1 is
chosen to maximize −¯λe 1
[
B E
1 ( ¯γ ) −L
]
− κ( 1 −e 1 ) . In both
cases, e 1 is optimally set less than ¯e . The broader point
is that bank covenants are more detailed and precisely
set than covenants in public debt because bank monitor-
ing costs and the value consequences of bank actions are
higher (see, for example, Kahan and Tuckman (1995) ).
5.2. Maximizing borrowing vs. maximizing payoff
For simplicity, we have assumed the expert’s objective
is to maximize her upfront borrowing. An alternative is to
assume an expert owns the project idea and needs to bor-
row to make a ﬁxed amount of investment upfront. Con-
ditional on being able to borrow that amount, the incum-
bent will try to avoid loan contracts that cause a surplus
loss. First, under the assumption C 2 > L , liquidation is al-
ways costly. Since liquidation will occur only under bank
ﬁnancing, this suggests a reason why the incumbent would
prefer internal-governance debt and performance-pricing
debt over bank ﬁnancing. The second source of surplus loss
comes if the incumbent loses her ability and must resell
the asset. In this case, the future incumbent earns rents
amounting to C 2 −B E
1 ( γ2 ) . Clearly, a contract that induces
higher effort ¯λ reduces the rents to future acquirers and
increases the initial incumbent’s surplus.
In a model that requires a ﬁxed amount of investment,
the expert will be forced to use bank debt if this is the
only contract that allows her to borrow enough. Otherwise,
she would avoid using it, because it might lead to early
liquidation.
5.3. Banks contributing to pledgeability
Thus far, banks only choose whether to intervene if
there is a covenant violation. In practice, intermediaries
may do more to improve the governance of their borrower
(this may be a role played by banks in less ﬁnancially de-
veloped markets; in developed markets by banks for small
young ﬁrms, by venture capitalists (VCs) for young inno-
vative ﬁrms, and by private equity for large mature ﬁrms).
For instance, VCs often work to make the enterprise more
transparent, governable, and acceptable to the stock mar-
ket (see Hellmann and Puri (2002); Rajan (2012) ).
We extend our model to study this role of ﬁnancial in-
termediaries. For simplicity, we assume ¯λ = 1 and λ = 0 so
that there is a one-to-one mapping between the incum-
bent’s effort and the realized pledgeability. Before the in-
cumbent sets pledgeability, the bank could augment its ﬁ-
nal value by β2 after paying an additional cost δ where
β2 ∈
{
0 , ¯β}
. The date-1 bid of experts is then B E
1 ( γ2 , β2 ) =
min
{ω E
1 + ( γ2 + β2 ) C 2 , C 2
}
.
Following the analysis in Section 3 , it is straightforward
to show that the incumbent expert will choose high
pledgeability γ2 = ¯γ if and only if D 1 ≤ D PayIC
1 ( β2 ) , where
D PayIC
1 ( β2 ) = θB E
1
(γ, β2
)
+ ( 1 − θ) B E
1 ( ¯γ, β2 ) − ε. Clearly,
D PayIC
1
(¯β)
≥ D PayIC
1 ( 0 ) , with the inequality being strict so
long as B E
1
(γ, 0
)
< C 2 . So high bank-determined pledge-
ability β2 = ¯β will increase the incumbent’s incentive-
compatible level of debt (unless liquidity is high enough
that pledgeability is never needed).
Next, let us turn to the bank’s incentive in choosing
pledgeability. The bank chooses β2 = ¯β if and only if
min
[
D 1 , B E
1
(γ2 , ¯β)]
−min
[
D 1 , B E
1 ( γ2 , 0 )
]
≥ δ. (11)
It is straightforward to show that the banker’s incen-
tive to increase pledgeability (the left hand side of the
constraint above) is maximized at D 1 = D PayIC
1
(¯β)
. This il-
lustrates an interesting double-blessing effect. Intuitively,
D 1 = D PayIC
1
(¯β)
is the highest claim that incentivizes γ2 =
¯γ if β2 = ¯β. However, such a high level of debt will induce
the incumbent to choose γ2 = γ if β2 = 0 . This means
the incumbent expert will choose high pledgeability if and
only if the bank also increases pledgeability. Therefore, in
addition to giving the bank the maximum beneﬁt of rais-
ing β2 , D 1 = D PayIC
1
(¯β)
will also induce high ﬁrm pledge-
ability. In this sense, ﬁrm internal governance and bank
governance can complement each other. Any higher debt
level will induce only the bank to raise pledgeability (a
“single-blessing,” which lowers the bank’s incentive to do
so), while a lower debt level will diminish the bank’s in-
centive to incur cost δ.
5.4. Intermediation and intermediary capital
So far, we have implicitly assumed the bank will re-
tain all the loans on its balance sheet and that the banker
is self-ﬁnanced. If the bank originates loans and ﬁnances
1289

===== PAGE 16 =====

D.W. Diamond, Y. Hu and R.G. Rajan Journal of Financial Economics 143 (2022) 1275–1294
them by raising money from investors, it will need to be
provided incentives to take costly actions such as veriﬁca-
tion or monitoring. We now analyze the implications for
bank capital (skin in the game).
Incentive compatibility requires that a suﬃciently large
part of the beneﬁt from a costly action accrues to the in-
termediary. In other words, the intermediary must retain
“skin in the game,” a suﬃciently large claim whose value
is increased by the costly action. We can see this most
easily in the case of certainty. For instance, consider Case
2 in Section 3.3 where B E
1 ( γ ) < L ≤ ¯l CV
1 . Without monitor-
ing, the bank will not liquidate the project. The repayment
is then B E
1 ( ¯γ ) with probability ¯π and B E
1 ( γ ) with proba-
bility 1 − ¯π. We would like to implement monitoring and
liquidation following a covenant violation. This can be ac-
complished as long as M = ( 1 − ¯π)
(
L −B E
1 ( γ )
)
≥ ψ. The
required bank capital structure is, in general, not unique,
once the bank’s stake is suﬃciently sensitive to its actions.
One feasible capital structure is for the bank to issue debt
claims on itself with face value B E
1 ( γ ) . Next, it sells a frac-
tion η of the equity and retains a fraction 1 − η, which sat-
isﬁes ( 1 − η) ( 1 − ¯π)
(
L −B E
1 ( γ )
)
= ψ. 15
Of course, when monitoring and veriﬁcation are
not needed (for example, internal governance debt or
covenant-lite debt), the intermediary can sell or borrow
against the entire loan. Thus full pass through funding
(with no requirement for intermediary skin in the game)
will occur in times of high future liquidity. Conversely, the
demand for the intermediary to have skin in the game is
highest in times of low prospective liquidity.
More generally, the form of the intermediary’s skin in
the game may vary with the nature of the desired interme-
diary intervention. If the intermediary is simply required to
collect information to verify covenant violation (or screen
out bad borrowers in a model of adverse selection), it is
suﬃcient that the skin in the game take the form of a pari
passu share in the loan repayments, or a junior stake in
them (bank or securitization equity). Of course, if the in-
termediary could delegate some of this information pro-
duction to an accounting ﬁrm (by requiring timely audited
ﬁnancial statements), the cost of information production
might be (close to) zero, and the loan could (almost) to-
tally sold or borrowed against, with little intermediary skin
in the game. If, however, the intermediary has to exert
costly effort to decide whether to liquidate, it must get a
strictly positive payment from liquidation. In this case, it
can help to have the loan made by the intermediary be ef-
fectively senior to some other claims on the project (see
Park (20 0 0); Rajan and Winton (1995) ), and the interme-
diary’s stake in the loan repayments should be suﬃciently
large and sensitive to its monitoring and liquidation ac-
tions.
Empirically, periods with extremely high liquidity
would thus be associated with either entry by highly lev-
ered intermediaries (such as pass through securitization
15 Similar results are in Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) ; DeMarzo and
Duﬃe (1999) , and Park (20 0 0) . Hu and Varas (2020) present a dynamic
model in which intermediary cannot commit to its skin-in-the-game. The
pricing impact deters the intermediary from selling too soon and too ag-
gressively.
vehicles) who do not screen or monitor and have a tiny
fraction of junior claim retained as “skin in the game,”
or a switch by banks to higher leverage and a suspension
of monitoring. 16 The securitization vehicles can buy loans
originated by banks or other intermediaries and the loans
will be covenant-lite. Thus covenant-lite loans will have a
large market share at times when intermediary leverage is
high and non-bank lending increases. From a policy per-
spective, demanding that intermediaries hold more skin in
the game during the period of high liquidity may be inef-
fective. It may simply accentuate the move toward lending
structures that minimize intermediary involvement.
In sum, our discussion in this subsection focuses
on the demand for intermediary services and conse-
quently for intermediary capital as liquidity conditions
vary. In contrast, most of the analysis of intermediary as-
set pricing and intermediary capital has studied the ef-
fects of variation in the supply of intermediary capital
(see Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014); He and Krishna-
murthy (2013); Holmstrom and Tirole (1997); Rampini and
Viswanathan (2019) for example). In such models, ﬂuctu-
ations in repayments shock intermediary net worth, and
thus the supply of intermediary capital. Because some
types of monitored lending can only occur if the interme-
diaries have suﬃcient own net worth, these shocks have
pervasive effects of their own (in addition to their direct
effects on intermediary net worth).
5.5. Alternative interpretations of liquidity and agency
problems
Note that a range of agency problems can be addressed
by future bidders bidding with their own wealth. Under-
lying this is the assumption that there is no problem with
the underlying asset (the ﬁrm), and its full production pos-
sibilities can be obtained in large measure by seizing and
selling the asset to the right expert. If, however, the asset
itself (and the cash ﬂows that can be produced with it),
rather than the human capital that controls it, is of vari-
able and hidden quality, future liquidity will be of little
help in correcting malfeasance. Similarly, if the incumbent
can make away with the asset in period 1 before it can
be sold upon default, date-1 liquidity will be of little use.
The broader point is that prospective liquidity can correct a
variety of problems of asymmetric information and moral
hazard, not all.
5.6. Complete contracts
If the aggregate state were observable and veriﬁable
and could be written into contracts, and there was no
other reason to use debt contracts (such as tax advan-
tages), then the face values on date 1 could be made state
contingent. 17 If so, the results without aggregate risk apply,
16 See Diamond (1984) ; DeMarzo (2005) ; DeMarzo and Duﬃe (1999) ,
and Gorton and Souleles (2006) for related work on the beneﬁts of secu-
ritization.
17 Our results are unchanged if the incumbent’s project is risk free and
only industry liquidity varies by state. In that case, to justify debt con-
tracts, it is suﬃcient (and plausible) to require that contracts cannot be
contingent on outside expert liquidity.
1290

===== PAGE 17 =====

D.W. Diamond, Y. Hu and R.G. Rajan Journal of Financial Economics 143 (2022) 1275–1294
state by state. The contract which raises the largest initial
proceeds in that state is chosen. There will be no need for
performance pricing to deal with pledgeability incentives.
With debt contracts (as we have seen) or contracts con-
tingent on a noisy measure of the aggregate state, we will
recover a role for performance pricing.
Finally, even with debt contracts let alone complete
contracts, there is no gain from making contract payments
contingent on the loss of ability of the incumbent. To
see this, let us assume the one-period debt is denoted as {
D θ
1 , D 1 −θ
1
}
, where the payment due depends on whether
the incumbent retains her ability or not. In the case with-
out the aggregate uncertainty, the IC constraint in choosing
high effort is
θ [
C 2 −D θ
1
]
+ ( 1 − θ)
[
B E
1 ( ¯γ ) −D 1 −θ
1
]
− ε
¯λ − λ
≥ θ [
C 2 −B E
1 ( γ )
]
, (12)
which implies the expected payments satisfy θD θ
1 +
( 1 − θ) D 1 −θ
1 ≤ D PayIC
1 . Therefore, in the case of straight
debt, making debt payments contingent on the incum-
bent’s ability does not alter either the incumbent’s IC con-
straint or the expected amount that the lender can collect.
5.7. Immediate increases in pledgeability
We have shown that current pledgeability choices
and the incentives for improved governance depend on
prospective liquidity through its effect on future bids by
experts. This follows because we assume that the effort
decision made by the initial incumbent inﬂuences future
pledgeability, i.e., cash ﬂows produced on date 2. Mean-
while, the pledgeability of date-1 cash ﬂows stays un-
changed (with pledgeability being zero). While this is plau-
sible, our key results go through without assuming it. In
Appendix A.2 , we analyze the model where the incum-
bent’s effort changes both the current and future pledge-
ability, i.e., cash ﬂows produced on both dates. A main dif-
ference between pledging out cash ﬂows C 1 and C 2 is that,
the former forces the incumbent to pay more and does not
affect how much the incumbent can sell the ﬁrm for in the
event that she loses her ability, whereas the latter does
affect the sale price. Therefore, compared to the model
where γ1 , the pledgeability of date-1 cash ﬂows, is ﬁxed,
the maximum amount that an expert can raise at date 0 is
never increased. If straight debt is used, this amount may
actually be lower, because the incentive to choose high ef-
fort is further reduced.
Bank veriﬁcation and monitoring become more attrac-
tive, because the threat of liquidation remains a pow-
erful incentive device. Essentially, pledgeable cash ﬂows
paid out before ﬁnancing or sale needs arise cannot ei-
ther reduce the cost of ﬁnancing or increase the proceeds
from selling the ﬁrm. Instead, they may even disincen-
tivize pledgeability effort when pledgeability effort s set s
pledgeability from now into the future. This is a down-
side associated with cash ﬂows that mature before ﬁnanc-
ing needs arise: pledging them is akin to securing short
term debt, potentially crowding out incentives for internal
governance, and forcing the lender to rely on monitoring
plus liquidation.
The broader point is that allowing for effort to change
both current and future pledgeability only changes the
model quantitatively. It will not eliminate the result
that the governance incentives decrease with increased
prospective liquidity.
6. Conclusion
While this paper describes how ﬁnancial intermediation
varies with prospective liquidity in the underlying real bor-
rowing sector, there is a more general point here. Liquid-
ity tends to diminish the consequences of many kinds of
moral hazard over repayment. Internal governance matters
little if the ﬁrm can be seized and sold for full repayment
in a Chapter 11 bankruptcy. Therefore, prospective liquid-
ity encourages leverage at both the borrower and interme-
diary level, even while requiring less governance. Equiv-
alently, because the intermediary performs fewer useful
functions, high prospective liquidity encourages disinter-
mediation.
Risky loans to highly leveraged borrowers, made by
highly leveraged intermediaries, may therefore not be ev-
idence of systemic moral hazard or over-optimism, but
may simply be a consequence of high prospective liq-
uidity crowding out intermediation. Such crowding out
may, of course, have adverse consequences. As prospec-
tive liquidity fades and the demand for intermediation
services expands again, the need for intermediary capi-
tal also increases. To the extent that intermediary capi-
tal is run down in periods when liquidity is expected to
be plentiful, it may not be available in suﬃcient quan-
tities when liquidity conditions turn and demand for
capital ramps up. Prospective liquidity breeds a depen-
dence on continued liquidity for debt enforcement as it
crowds out other modes of enforcement, especially cor-
porate governance. This will make debt returns more
skewed.
We have not examined multiple claims on the same
ﬁrm and the relationship between creditors (see, for exam-
ple, Bolton and Scharfstein (1996); Diamond (1993) ). We
have also not explored how intermediaries might behave
as the demand for their services wax and wane. Can they
shrink easily after having expanded, or do they compete
for mandates even when they have little comparative ad-
vantage relative to other forms of ﬁnance? Does this con-
tribute to ﬁnancial fragility? We have also not explored
other factors that would increase prospective liquidity such
as accommodative monetary policy or irrational exuber-
ance. Finally, at a macroeconomic level, liquidity is endoge-
nous and deserves to be explored further (see, for example,
Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) ). These are important areas for
future research.
Appendix A. Proofs
Proof of Lemma 4.1. Let us deﬁne V s 1
1
(
D 1 , ¯λ)
, V s 1
1
(
D 1 , λ)
, and
/Delta1s 1
1 ( D 1 ) as in Section 3 . Assumption 1 leads to B E,G
1
(γ )
>
1291

===== PAGE 18 =====

D.W. Diamond, Y. Hu and R.G. Rajan Journal of Financial Economics 143 (2022) 1275–1294
B E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) . If q /Delta1max ,G
1 + ( 1 −q ) /Delta1max ,B
1 > 0 , then
D IC
1 = D G,PayIC
1 − ( 1 −q )
q
{
θ [
B E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) −B E,B
1
(γ )]
+
ε
¯λ − λ
}
> B E,G
1
(γ )
. (A.1)
Otherwise,
D IC
1 = D B,PayIC
1
+
q
1 −q
{
( 1 − θ)
[
B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) −B E,G
1
(γ )]
− ε
¯λ − λ
}
< B E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) . (A.2)
The solution to D IC
1 is unique unless
q
{
( 1 − θ)
[
B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) −B E,G
1
(γ )]
− ε
¯λ − λ
}
= ( 1 −q )
{
θ [
B E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) −B E,B
1
(γ )]
+
ε
¯λ − λ
}
, (A.3)
in which case we pick the highest solution. At B E,G
1
(γ )
= C 2 , D IC
1 = D B,PayIC
1 . In this case, l IG
0 = D B,PayIC
1 + ( 1 −q ) (
1 − ¯λ)
B E,B
1
(γ )
, and l CL
0 = qC 2 + ( 1 −q )
[λB E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) + ( 1 − λ)
B E,B
1
(γ )]
. A comparison between them shows that l IG
0 < l CL
0
if and only if
q
[
C 2 −D B,PayIC
1
]
> ( 1 −q )
[¯λ( 1 − θ) − λ][
B E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) −B E,B
1
(γ )]
,
(A.4)
which holds if q is suﬃciently high. In this case, ω ∗ exists.
The uniqueness follows from the monotonicity of l IG
0 −l CL
0
with respect to ω E,G
1 once B E,G
1
(γ )
< C 2 = B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) .
Proof of Lemma 4.2. Let us write down the incumbent’s IC
constraint in choosing high effort:
¯λ( 1 −e 1 )
{
q
[θC 2 + ( 1 − θ) B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) −D 1
]
+ ( 1 −q )
[θC 2 + ( 1 − θ) B E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) −min
{
D 1 , B E,B
1 ( ¯γ )
}]}
+ ¯λe 1
{
qθ[
C 2 −B E,G
1 ( ¯γ )
]
+ ( 1 −q ) θ[
C 2 −B E,B
1 ( ¯γ )
]}
+
(
1 − ¯λ){
qθ[
C 2 −B E,G
1
(γ )]
+ ( 1 −q ) θ[
C 2 −B E,B
1
(γ )]}
− ε
≥ λ( 1 −e 1 )
{
q
[θC 2 + ( 1 − θ) B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) −D 1
]
+ ( 1 −q )
[θC 2 + ( 1 − θ) B E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) −min
{
D 1 , B E,B
1 ( ¯γ )
}]}
+ λe 1
{
qθ[
C 2 −B E,G
1 ( ¯γ )
]
+ ( 1 −q ) θ[
C 2 −B E,B
1 ( ¯γ )
]}
+ ( 1 − λ)
{
qθ[
C 2 −B E,G
1
(γ )]
+ ( 1 −q ) θ[
C 2 −B E,B
1
(γ )]}
.
(A.5)
While seemingly complicated, the inequality is straightfor-
ward: with probability λ( 1 −e 1 ) , the realized pledgeabil-
ity is high, and the covenant is not violated. In this case,
the incumbent manager receives θC 2 + ( 1 − θ) B E,s 1
1 ( ¯γ ) and
repays min
{
D 1 , B E,s 1
1 ( ¯γ )
}
. With probability λe 1 , however,
the type-I error occurs, in which case D 1 is augmented
to ˜ D 1 = B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) . Therefore, the incumbent only receives a
payoff
[
C 2 −B E,s 1
1 ( ¯γ )
]
if she retains her ability. With prob-
ability ( 1 − λ) , the realized pledgeability is low and the
covenant is correctly triggered. In this case, the incumbent
receives a payoff
[
C 2 −B E,s 1
1
(γ )]
if she retains her ability.
Finally, the incumbent incurs the cost of effort ε. This con-
straint is easily simpliﬁed to
( 1 −e 1 )
{
q
[
B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) −D 1
]
+ ( 1 −q ) max
{
B E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) −D 1 , 0
}}
− ε
¯λ − λ
≥ θ {
q
[
B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) −B E,G
1
(γ )]
+ ( 1 −q )
[
B E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) −B E,B
1
(γ )]}
. (A.6)
Given that the left-hand side is decreasing in D 1 , the con-
dition on e 1 follows from evaluating the constraint at D 1 =
0 . In particular, the detailed expression is
¯e 1 = 1
−
θ{
q
[
B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) −B E,G
1
(γ )]
+ ( 1 −q )
[
B E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) −B E,B
1
(γ )]}
+ ε
¯λ−λ
qB E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) + ( 1 −q ) B E,B
1 ( ¯γ )
.
(A.7)
Evaluating the constraint at D 1 = B E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) , we get two
cases.
(i) If
( 1 −e 1 ) q
[
B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) −B E,B
1 ( ¯γ )
]
− ε
¯λ − λ
≥ θ {
q
[
B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) −B E,G
1
(γ )]
+ ( 1 −q )
[
B E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) −B E,B
1
(γ )]}
, (A.8)
then
D P
1 = B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) − θ
q ( 1 −e 1 )
{
q
[
B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) −B E,G
1
(γ )]
+ ( 1 −q )
[
B E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) −B E,B
1
(γ )]}
− ε
q ( 1 −e 1 )
(¯λ − λ) > B E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) . (A.9)
(ii) Otherwise,
D P
1 =
[
qB E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) + ( 1 −q ) B E,B
1 ( ¯γ )
]
− θ
1 −e 1
{
q
[
B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) −B E,G
1
(γ )]
+ ( 1 −q )
[
B E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) −B E,B
1
(γ )]}
− ε
( 1 −e 1 )
(¯λ − λ) ≤ B E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) . (A.10)
Lemma A.1 . In performance-pricing debt, it is without loss of
generality to assume ˜ D 1 = B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) .
Proof: Let us write down the IC constraint under {
D 1 , ˜ D 1
}
:
¯λ( 1 −e 1 )
{
q
[θC 2 + ( 1 − θ) B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) −D 1
]
+ ( 1 −q )
[θC 2 + ( 1 − θ) B E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) −min
{
D 1 , B E,B
1 ( ¯γ )
}]}
+ ¯λ( 1 −e 1 )
{
q
[θC 2 + ( 1 − θ) B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) − ˜ D 1
]
1292

===== PAGE 19 =====

D.W. Diamond, Y. Hu and R.G. Rajan Journal of Financial Economics 143 (2022) 1275–1294
+ ( 1 −q )
[θC 2 + ( 1 − θ) B E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) −min
{˜ D 1 , B E,B
1 ( ¯γ )
}]}
+
(
1 − ¯λ){
q
[θC 2 + ( 1 − θ) B E,G
1
(γ )
− ˜ D 1
]
+ ( 1 −q )
[θC 2 + ( 1 − θ) B E,B
1
(γ )
−min
{˜ D 1 , B E,B
1
(γ )}]}
− ε
≥ λ( 1 −e 1 )
{
q
[θC 2 + ( 1 − θ) B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) −D 1
]
+ ( 1 −q )
[θC 2 + ( 1 − θ) B E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) −min
{
D 1 , B E,B
1 ( ¯γ )
}]}
+ λ( 1 −e 1 )
{
q
[θC 2 + ( 1 − θ) B E,G
1 ( ¯γ ) − ˜ D 1
]
+ ( 1 −q )
[θC 2 + ( 1 − θ) B E,B
1 ( ¯γ ) −min
{˜ D 1 , B E,B
1 ( ¯γ )
}]}
+ ( 1 − λ)
{
q
[θC 2 + ( 1 − θ) B E,G
1
(γ )
− ˜ D 1
]
+ ( 1 −q )
[θC 2 + ( 1 − θ) B E,B
1
(γ )
−min
{˜ D 1 , B E,B
1
(γ )}]}
.
(A.11)
Meanwhile, the goal is to maximize
l P
0 = ¯λ( 1 −e 1 )
{
qD 1 + ( 1 −q ) min
{
D 1 , B E,B
1 ( ¯γ )
}}
+ ¯λ( 1 −e 1 )
{
q ˜ D 1 + ( 1 −q ) min
{˜ D 1 , B E,B
1 ( ¯γ )
}}
+
(
1 − ¯λ){
q ˜ D 1 + ( 1 −q ) B E,B
1
(γ )}
− ε. (A.12)
Let
{
D ∗
1 , ˜ D ∗
1

}
be the solution. If we increase ˜ D ∗
1
 and de-
crease D ∗
1
 such that l P
0 is unchanged, it is straightforward to
see that the IC constraint gets more slack because ¯λ > λ.
Q.E.D.
A1. Type-II error
For simplicity, we have assumed that the signal φ only
involves a type-I error. A type-II error, where low pledge-
ability may not trigger a covenant violation, will only
change the results qualitatively, as we show in this subsec-
tion; it makes it harder to incentivize effort. Speciﬁcally, let
us assume that if γ2 = γ, the signal is φ = φH with prob-
ability e 2 and φ = φL with probability 1 −e 2 . In this case,
we need to redeﬁne ¯π =
¯λe 1
¯λe 1 +
(
1 −¯λ)
( 1 −e 2 ) . Again, we are go-
ing to focus on the case without the aggregate risk.
In the case of performance-pricing debt, the incum-
bent’s payoff stays unchanged (and remains no better than
straight debt.) The incumbent could retain control by pay-
ing B E
1 ( γ ) .
The presence of the type-II error reduces the incum-
bent’s incentive to choose high effort under monitoring.
To see this, suppose that the bank monitors following a
covenant violation and liquidates the project if it learns the
pledgeability is low. In this case, the incumbent’s IC con-
straint in choosing high effort becomes
¯λ( 1 −e 1 )
[θC 2 + ( 1 − θ) B E
1 ( ¯γ ) −D 1
]
+ ¯λe 1 θ [
C 2 −B E
1 ( ¯γ )
]
+
(
1 − ¯λ)
e 2 θ [
C 2 −B E
1
(γ )]
− ε
≥ λ( 1 −e 1 )
[θC 2 + ( 1 − θ) B E
1 ( ¯γ ) −D 1
]
+ λe 1 θ [
C 2 −B E
1 ( ¯γ )
]
+ ( 1 − λ) e 2 θ [
C 2 −B E
1
(γ )]
.
(A.13)
If e 2 = 0 , this constraint is always slack whenever D 1 ≤
B E
1 ( ¯γ ) . Under a general e 2 , the constraint holds if and
only if D 1 ≤ θ( 1 −e 2 ) C 2 + ( 1 −e 1 −θ) B E
1 ( ¯γ ) + e 2 θB E
1 ( γ )
( 1 −e 1 ) − ε (¯λ−λ)
( 1 −e 1 ) .
The higher is e 2 , the lower the right hand side, and lower
the incentive compatible level of debt.
By a similar argument, in the case of aggregate uncer-
tainty an increase in the probability of a high type-II er-
ror will reduce the amount that can be raised with perfor-
mance pricing, whenever performance pricing raises more
than straight debt.
A2. Current and future pledgeability
Let us elaborate on how our results vary when the
incumbent’s effort affects both contemporaneous and fu-
ture pledgeability. We keep assuming γ2 ∈
{γ, ¯γ }
and
now allow γ1 ∈
{γ1 , ¯γ1
}
. The model presented in the pa-
per corresponds to the case where γ1 = ¯γ1 = 0 . In this
model, whenever the incumbent chooses effort λ ∈
{¯λ, λ}
,
with probability λ, γ2 = ¯γ and γ1 = ¯γ1 . With probabil-
ity 1 − λ, γ2 = γ and γ1 = γ1 . Throughout, we focus on
the case without aggregate uncertainty so that the re-
sults can be directly comparable with those in Section 3 .
Let ˜ V 1
(
D 1 , λ)
be the incumbent’s payoff when she chooses
λ:
˜ V 1 ( D 1 , λ) = λ{θ [
C 2 −Min
[
B E
1 ( ¯γ ) , D 1
]]
+ ( 1 − θ)
[
B E
1 ( ¯γ ) −Min
[
B E
1 ( ¯γ ) , D 1
]]
+ ( 1 − ¯γ1 ) C 1
}
+ ( 1 − λ)
{θ [
C 2 −Min
[
B E
1 ( γ ) , D 1
]]
+ (1 − θ)
[
B E
1 ( γ ) −Min
[
B E
1 ( γ ) , D 1
]]
+
(
1 − γ1
)
C 1
}
− ε1 { λ= ¯λ}
= V 1 ( D 1 , λ) + λ( 1 − ¯γ1 ) C 1 + ( 1 − λ)
(
1 − γ1
)
C 1 ,
(A.14)
where V 1
(
D 1 , λ)
is the payoff shown  in subsection
2.A under γ1 ≡ 0 . Similarly, let us deﬁne ˜ /Delta11
(
D 1
)
=
˜ V 1
(
D 1 , ¯λ)
− ˜ V 1
(
D 1 , λ)
, which simpliﬁes into ˜ /Delta11
(
D 1
)
=
/Delta11
(
D 1
)
−
(¯λ − λ)(
¯γ1 − γ1
)
C 1 , where /Delta11
(
D 1
)
is the same
as in Lemma 3.1 . Deﬁne ˜ D PayIC
1 = θB E
1 ( γ ) + (1 − θ) B E
1 ( ¯γ ) −(
¯γ1 − γ1
)
C 1 − ε (¯λ−λ), which is shown also as ˜ D PayIC
1 =
D PayIC
1 −
(
¯γ1 − γ1
)
C 1 . There are two cases.
(i) If ˜ D PayIC
1 > B E
1 ( γ ) , then under straight debt, ˜ D PayIC
1 is the
maximum face value that still induces high effort. In
this case, the initial expert can borrow
˜ l IG
0 ≡ ¯λ(
¯γ1 C 1 + ˜ D PayIC
1
)
+
(
1 − ¯λ)(γ1 C 1 + B E
1 ( γ )
)
.
(A.15)
Note that in the benchmark model where γ1 ≡ γ1 ,
l IG
0 ≡ ¯λ(γ1 C 1 + D PayIC
1
)
+
(
1 − ¯λ)(γ1 C 1 + B E
1 ( γ )
)
= ˜ l IG
0 .
(A.16)
In other words, the ability to increase current pledge-
ability γ1 does not increase the overall amount that
the experts can borrow under internal-governance
debt. Obviously, the amount that can be raised under
covenant-lite debt will stays unchanged. Given so, the
amount under performance-pricing debt also stays un-
changed. Bank loan with monitoring is able to raise
more
1293

===== PAGE 20 =====

D.W. Diamond, Y. Hu and R.G. Rajan Journal of Financial Economics 143 (2022) 1275–1294
˜ l M
0 = ¯λ(
¯γ1 C 1 + B E
1 ( ¯γ )
)
+
(
1 − ¯λ)
L −
[¯λe 1 +
(
1 − ¯λ)]ψ,
(A.17)
which exceeds the amount
l M
0 = ¯λ(γ1 C 1 + B E
1 ( ¯γ )
)
+
(
1 − ¯λ)
L −
[¯λe 1 +
(
1 − ¯λ)]ψ
(A.18)
if γ1 ≡ γ1 . Therefore, bank loans can be more attrac-
tive.
(ii) If ˜ D PayIC
1 ≤ B E
1 ( γ ) , then under straight debt, high ef-
fort in choosing pledgeability can never been induced.
Performance-pricing debt cannot do better either, be-
cause the elevated face value later will require an even
lower face value to begin with. Bank monitoring in this
case will be more helpful, because the threat of liqui-
dation is still suﬃcient to induce high effort.
References
Acharya, V. , Viswanathan, S. , 2011. Leverage, moral hazard, and liquidity.
J. Finance 66, 99–138 .
Asquith, P. , Beatty, A. , Weber, J. , 2005. Performance pricing in bank debt
contracts. J. Account. Econ. 40, 101–128 .
Benmelech, E., Kumar, N., Rajan, R., 2020. The decline of secured debt.
Unpublished working paper. University of Chicago.
Berlin, M. , Mester, L.J. , 1992. Debt covenants and renegotiation. J. Financ.
Intermed. 2, 95–133 .
Bolton, P. , Scharfstein, D. , 1996. Optimal debt structure and the number of
creditors. J. Polit. Econ. 104 (1), 1–25 .
Borio, C. , 2014. The ﬁnancial cycle and macroeconomics: what have we
learnt? J. Bank. Finance 45, 182–198 .
Bradley, M. , Roberts, M.R. , 2015. The structure and pricing of corporate
debt covenants. Q. J. Finance 5, 1–37 .
Brunnermeier, M.K. , Sannikov, Y. , 2014. A macroeconomic model with a
ﬁnancial sector. Am. Econ. Rev. 104 (2), 379–421 .
Christensen, H.B. , Nikolaev, V.V. , 2012. Capital versus performance
covenants in debt contracts. J. Account. Res. 50 (1), 75–116 .
DeMarzo, P. , 2005. The pooling and tranching of securities: a model of
informed intermediation. Rev. Financ. Stud. 18 (1), 1–35 .
DeMarzo, P. , Duﬃe, D. , 1999. A liquidity-based model of security design.
Econometrica 67 (1), 65–99 .
Diamond, D.W. , 1984. Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring.
Rev. Econ. Stud. 51, 393–414 .
Diamond, D.W. , 1991. Monitoring and reputation: the choice between
bank loans and directly placed debt. J. Polit. Econ. 99, 689–721 .
Diamond, D.W. , 1993. Seniority and maturity of debt contracts. J. Financ.
Econ. 33, 341–368 .
Diamond, D.W. , Hu, Y. , Rajan, R.G. , 2020. Pledgeability, industry liquidity,
and ﬁnancing cycles. J. Finance 75 (1), 419–461 .
Dichev, I. , Skinner, D. , 2002. Large sample evidence on the debt covenant
hypothesis. J. Account. Res. 40, 1091–1123 .
Dow, J. , Gorton, G. , Krishnamurthy, A. , 2005. Equilibrium investment and
asset prices under imperfect corporate control. Am. Econ. Rev. 95,
359–681 .
Eisfeldt, A. , Rampini, A. , 2006. Capital reallocation and liquidity. J. Monet.
Econ. 53, 369–399 .
Eisfeldt, A. , Rampini, A. , 2008. Managerial incentives, capital reallocation,
and the business cycle. J. Financ. Econ. 87, 177–199 .
Gennaioli, N. , Shleifer, A. , Vishny, R. , 2015. Neglected risks: the psychology
of ﬁnancial crises. Am. Econ. Rev. 105 (5), 310–314 .
Halling, M., Yu, J., Zechner, J., 2020. The Dynamics of Corporate Debt
Structure. Unpublished working paper. Swedish House of Finance.
Gorton, G. , Souleles, N.S. , 2006. Special purpose vehicles and securitiza-
tion. Risks Financ. Inst. 549–602 .
Hackbarth, D. , Hennessy, C.A. , Leland, H.E. , 2007. Can the trade-off theory
explain debt structure? Rev. Financ. Stud. 20 (5), 1389–1428 .
Hanson, S. , Shleifer, A. , Stein, J. , Vishny, R. , 2015. Banks as patient ﬁxed-in-
come investors. J. Financ. Econ. 117 (3), 449–469 .
Hart, O. , Moore, J. , 1994. A theory of debt based on the inalienability of
human capital. Q. J. Econ. 109, 841–879 .
He, Z. , Krishnamurthy, A. , 2013. Intermediary asset pricing. Am. Econ. Rev.
103 (2), 732–770 .
Hellmann, T. , Puri, M. , 2002. Venture capital and the professionalization
of start-up ﬁrms: empirical evidence. J. Finance 57, 169–197 .
Holmstrom, B. , Tirole, J. , 1997. Financial intermediation, loanable funds,
and the real sector. Q. J. Econ. 112, 663–691 .
Hu, Y., 2017. A dynamic theory of bank lending, ﬁrm entry, and invest-
ment ﬂuctuations. Unpublished working paper. University of North
Carolina.
Hu, Y., Varas, F., 2020. Intermediary Financing without Commitment,
working paper. Unpublished working paper. University of North Car-
olina.
Ivashina, V. , Iverson, B. , Smith, D.C. , 2016. The ownership and trading
of debt claims in chapter 11 restructurings. J. Financ. Econ. 119 (2),
316–335 .
Jensen, M.C. , 1989. Eclipse of the Public Corporation. HARVARD BUSINESS
REVIEW . (Sept.-Oct. 1989), revised 1997.
Jensen, M.C. , 1986. Agency costs of free cash ﬂow, corporate ﬁnance, and
takeovers.. Am. Econ. Rev. 76 (2), 323–329 .
Johnson, S. , Boone, P. , Breach, A. , Friedman, E. , 20 0 0. Corporate gover-
nance in the Asian ﬁnancial crisis. J. Financ. Econ. 58, 1–2 .
Kahan, M. , Tuckman, B. , 1995. Private versus public lending: evidence
from covenants. In: Finnerty, J.D., Fridson, M.S. (Eds.), The Yearbook
of Fixed Income Investing. Irwin .
Kaplan, S.N. , Stromberg, P. , 2003. Financial contracting theory meets the
real world: an empirical analysis of venture capital contracts. Rev.
Econ. Stud. 70, 281–315 .
Kermani, A., Ma, Y., 2020. Two Tales of Debt, working paper. Unpublished
working paper. University of Chicago.
Kiyotaki, N. , Moore, J. , 1997. Credit cycles. J. Polit. Econ. 105, 211–248 .
Manove, M. , Padilla, A.J. , Pagano, M. , 2001. Collateral versus project
screening: a model of lazy banks. Rand J. Econ. 32, 726–744 .
Nikolaev, V.V. , 2018. Scope for renegotiation in private debt contracts. J.
Account. Econ. 65, 270–301 .
Nini, G., Smith, D., Suﬁ, A., 2012. Creditor Control Rights, Corporate Gov-
ernance, and Firm Value. Vol. 25.
Park, C. , 20 0 0. Monitoring and structure of debt contracts. J. Finance 55,
2157–2195 .
Philippon, T. , 2006. Corporate governance over the business cycle. J. Econ.
Dyn. Control 30 (11), 2117–2141 .
Rajan, R.G. , 2012. Presidential address: the corporation in ﬁnance. J. Fi-
nance 67 (4), 1173–1217 .
Rajan, R.G. , Winton, A. , 1995. Covenants and collateral as incentives to
monitor. J. Finance 50, 1113–1146 .
Rampini, A .A . , Viswanathan, S. , 2010. Collateral, risk management, and the
distribution of debt capacity. J. Finance 65 (6), 2293–2322 .
Rampini, A .A . , Viswanathan, S. , 2019. Financial intermediary capital, the
review of economic studies. Rev. Econ. Stud. 86, 413–455 .
Saavedra, D. , 2018. Syndicate size and the choice of covenants in debt
contracts. The Accounting Review 93 (6), 301–329 Saavedra (2018).
In press .
1294