

===== PAGE 1 =====

Token-based Platform Finance :
Online Appendix
Lin William Cong† Ye Li§ Neng Wang‡
†Cornell University Johnson Graduate School of Management. E-mail: will.cong@cornell.edu
§The Ohio State University Fisher College of Business. E-mail: li.8935@osu.edu
‡Columbia Business School and NBER. E-mail: neng.wang@columbia.edu

===== PAGE 2 =====

A. Institutional background
This section provides the institutional background of token-based platforms. We discuss
how platforms, blockchains, and the use of tokens are all connected in practice, using the
Kik/Kin system and various other real-life examples. First, the platform token plays dual
roles: it serves as local means of payment among users, and as a platform ﬁnancing tool
(contributors’ compensation), and it gathers eﬀorts and resources for platform development.
Second, platform designers (owners and entrepreneurs) increasingly utilize token-supply
strategies to manage platform development dynamically, and derive beneﬁts by issuing tokens
to themselves and actively managing the total amount of tokens in circulation. We highlight
that, on traditional and blockchain-based platforms, entrepreneurs and platform owners
exercise signiﬁcant discretion in dynamic token allocation, which is a salient feature of our
baseline model. Finally, we discuss how blockchain technology can limit discretion and enable
commitment.
To start, we note that in the past few years, over 1,000 cryptocurrencies have been
introduced on digital platforms. In these applications, including Bitcoin and Ripple, blockchains
provide a relatively decentralized consensus that helps avoid double-spending and enables
digital currencies to act as a media of exchange among platform users. In terms of crowd-based
ﬁnancing, blockchain-based crypto tokens have also emerged as a popular means to raise
funds for startups (e.g., Howell et al., 2018; Davydiuk et al., 2019). In Initial Coin Oﬀerings
(ICOs), Security Token Oﬀerings (STOs), and Initial Exchange Oﬀerings (IEOs), entrepreneurs
sell “tokens” or “AppCoins” to dispersed investors around the globe. 1 Moreover, tokens are
routinely used as compensation for talents joining the startup teams. Kik/Kin constitutes a
well-known example.
1While the ﬁrst ICO in 2013 raised a meager $500,000 and had sporadic activities over the next two
years. 2016 saw 46 ICOs raising about $100 million and according to CoinSchedule, in 2017 there were
235 ICOs. The year-end totals came in over $3 billion raised in ICOs. In August 2017, OmiseGO (OMG)
and Qtum passed a US$1 billion market cap recently, according to coinmarketcap.com, to become the ﬁrst
ERC20 tokens built on the Ethereum network and sold via an ICO to reach the unicorn status.
A-1

===== PAGE 3 =====

A.1. Kik/Kin case
Kik Interative Inc. is a social media messaging company founded in Waterloo in 2009. It
is currently involved in a well-publicized lawsuit with the SEC for violations of the Securities
Act. Kik introduced a messaging app “Kik Messenger” in 2010 that later became one of the
most popular social media applications (Brenner, 2018).
To better compete with larger players in the advertising market and to allow its users
to monetize their participation, in 2014 Kik launched Kik Points, a virtual currency within
Kik Messenger. Advertisers can exchange ﬁat money with Kik for points to pay consumers
for answering surveys and polls and consumers can pay for purchases and usage with the
points. Kik Points while in operation created an average of 300,000 daily transactions, but
advertisers and users were concerned that nothing prevents Kik from creating more Kik
Points or not accepting them entirely in the future.
The company therefore conceived towards the end of 2016 a new blockchain-based platform,
Kin, which issues native tokens for user transactions and compensations for dispersed contributors
in an ecosystem for digital services and social network wherein Kik is a key founding
member.2 The Kin project is overseen by the Kin Foundation and aims to oﬀer Kik and
similar developers a way to monetize their businesses, which was previously diﬃcult without
a large initial scale or potentially abusing user data. The blockchain-based token can credibly
have a limited supply. Moreover, token demand can be boosted by token usage not only on
Kik Messenger but also for a potentially unlimited number of applications, services, and
products oﬀered by participating developers. Therefore, Kin has the potential to overcome
the concern of over supply and value destruction.
Importantly, even though the maximum supply of Kin is at $10 trillion, the founding team
and the Kin Foundation actively manage token allocations (e.g., using smart contracts): 30%
is pre-allocated to the original Kik platform for being a founding member of Kin and early
2Facebook’s role in the creation of Libra coins is similar.
A-2

===== PAGE 4 =====

adopter; 10% (1 trillion) of Kin tokens are issued to dispersed investors in a two-week ICO
in 2017, raising about US$100 million; 60% is initially allocated to the Kin Foundation
and is to be gradually distributed to early users and contributors through the Kin Rewards
Engine schema or used to cover operation and marketing expenses. Every year, 20% of
the remaining token reserves at the Kin Foundation are released to corporate partners, for
example, as incentive payments for decentralized contributions. While it is unclear whether
Kik and Kin optimally designed the allocation, they apparently thought about issues related
to promoting user adoption, incentivizing third-party contributors to the system, controlling
inﬂation, and compensating key personnel and partners while growing the platform.
A.2. Common features of token-based platforms
The case of Kik/Kin leads to the following three observations that apply generally to
blockchain-based platforms.
(i) Token embedding. It should be clear from the example that tokens are used as a
platform currency/local medium of exchange — a “Token Embedding” phenomenon ﬁrst
highlighted in CLW. Indeed, in many blockchain applications, native tokens are the required
or favored medium of exchange.3 For example, it is cheaper to make international payments
and settlements using Ripples (RXP) on the Ripple network; to make proﬁts by providing
validation services, OmiseGo (OMG) tokens are required as stakes on the OmiseGo blockchain;
even though the Ethereum platform allows other AppCoins and cryptocurrencies, many
transactions and fundraising activities are still carried out using Ethers (ETH) due to the
convenience and popularity. Moreover, platformentrepreneurs and owners actively design the
3See also Brunnermeier et al. (2019) who conclude, “Payments are at the center of any economic platform,
and all other activities would organize themselves around the central payment functionality.” Even though
policy makers often generically refer to non-cash-ﬂow-based tokens as “utility tokens,” the majority of them
are not to redeem a product or service from the entrepreneur per se at ﬁxed prices. They simply represent
the right to use the platforms to conduct business. These include many of the high-proﬁle projects: Filecoin,
Golem, 0x, Civic, Raiden, and Basic Attention Token (BAT). Prices are not pre-set but emerge from markets
where the users’ token demand meet the platforms’ supply.
A-3

===== PAGE 5 =====

rules for token supplies and attributes and use tokens to compensate resource contributors
(investors, developers, etc.), as well as to manage the platform development.
We note that it is natural and common in practice to introduce platform tokens that
agents hold and use because transfers in ﬁat currencies inevitably rely on centralized third
parties such as banks that are subject to the conﬁnes of physical locations and jurisdictions.
Tokens, in contrast, can be used not only for peer-to-peer exchanges, but also for compensating
miners, validators, and other contributors who work to improve the stability and functionality
of the ecosystem. This is especially convenient because cryptocurrency miners who maintain
network securities under the Proof-of-Work protocol and liquidity providers in a staking-based
system are not long-term employees of the platform and demand on the spot, reliable
payments. Moreover, native coins can be directly linked to the history of transactions and
events on the blockchain, a feature other currencies cannot provide. 4
There are many examples other than the Kin project. Filecoin (FIL) is used as the
sole means of payment in the network marketplace to reward miners for block creation
in the Filecoin consensus process. Another example is Basic Attention Token (BAT).
As explained in the BAT token launch research report, BAT also functions as a medium
exchange between users, advertisers, and publishers who participate in the Brave browser
ecosystem. Advertisers purchase ads using BAT tokens, which are then distributed among
both publishers and browser users as compensation for hosting the ads and viewing them,
respectively.
The fact that platforms including blockchain-based ones tend to introduce tokens is
only one aspect of token embedding. In principle no one needs to hold the native token if
its velocity is inﬁnite (i.e., people can instantaneously exchange other currencies with the
native tokens). The second aspect of token embedding is that agents actually need to hold
4Kocherlakota (1998) models money as an object that does not enter utility or production functions. He
then shows that from a technological point of view, money is equivalent to a primitive form of memory. With
the blockchain technology, money is indeed memory. Tokens are useful as a means of payment and stores of
value precisely because of agents’ knowledge of full histories of token-based transactions.
A-4

===== PAGE 6 =====

the tokens to conduct transactions and perform economic activities. While this is also true
for ﬁat money in practice, blockchain-based systems add at least three more reasons.
First, to incentivize and allocate service ﬂows to decentralized miners or service providers,
many tokens are designed such that these agents have to hold the native tokens to earn the
right to perform work to maintain the system, be it service provision or recordkeeping.
Proof-of-Stake protocols typically fall in this category. These tokens are sometimes referred
to as work tokens or staking tokens, and notable implementations include Keep (oﬀ-chain
private computation), Filecoin (distributed ﬁle storage), Truebit (oﬀ-chain computation),
Livepeer (distributed video encoding), and Gems (decentralized mechanical Turk). 5
Second, blockchains enable the use of smart contracts, which are digital contracts allowing
terms contingent on decentralized consensus that are typically self-enforcing and tamper-proof
through automated execution. Smart contracts need to automate transactions once certain
contingencies are fulﬁlled, which in turn requires a certain amount of tokens to be “escrowed”
during the episode that such contingencies may be triggered.
Third, because the generation of decentralized consensus takes time, there exist technical
and economic limits on how quickly transactions can be validated and recorded (Chiu
and Koeppl, 2017). While many protocols such as the Lightening Network and Ethereum
process transactions signiﬁcantly faster than Bitcoin (seconds versus 10-11 minutes), the
decentralized nature of the validation means it takes time to ensure robustness and synchronization
of the consensus. During the conﬁrmation period, agents have to hold tokens.
(ii) Dynamic token supply and platform management. Admittedly, much of the
discussion on cryptocurrency has focused on its role as a competitor for ﬁat currency for
general payments. In a way, ﬁat currencies are also an extreme form of platform tokens in
5To enforce a mechanism to penalize workers who fail to perform their job to some pre-speciﬁed standard,
work tokens have to be held as collateral. For example, in Filecoin, service providers contractually commit
to storing some data with 24/7 access and some minimum bandwidth guarantee for a speciﬁed period of
time. During the contract term, service providers must “escrow” some number of Filecoin, which can be
automatically slashed (taken away) should they fail to perform the service.
A-5

===== PAGE 7 =====

that people “join” the platform by recognizing their value and accepting them (Gans and
Halaburda, 2015), and the platform being the broader economy. What distinguishes tokens
on digital platforms is that the adoption is no longer dictated by physical constraints: it
is way more costly to adopt a diﬀerent ﬁat currency by emigrating to a diﬀerent country,
but switching among digital platforms is relatively easy, which implies that the adoption of
digital platforms is more endogenous than the adoption of a ﬁat currency.
Not only is user adoption on platforms endogenous, the development of platforms is as
well. Just like executives manage ﬁrms’ hiring and investment dynamically, tokens allow
entrepreneurs to manage the contributions from dispersed agents in the network and thus
manage the evolution of the platform. It is not only about a one-time ICO. Blockchain-based
platforms often pay workers (contributors) on the spot with their tokens on an on-going basis,
instead of a contract that promises the typical deferred compensation. 6
For example, Kin tokens were issued to allow broad adoption and contribution by developers
and users to foster a “virtuous cycle in which the ecosystem grows in both size and quality”
(Livingston, 2017). Through measures such as capping individual purchases at $4,400, Kik
structured the oﬀering to encourage actual usage of the tokens as a medium of exchange,
instead of hoarding and speculation. It is believed that a token-based ecosystem of independent
users and developers would have the right incentives to grow the platform. Indeed, by
the end of 2018, Kin exceeded Ether and Bitcoin in blockchain user activities according to
blocktivity.info. Both the Apple App and Google Play Stores accept Kin as a digital currency;
the Kin ecosystem has also integrated dozens of third-party apps including Perfect 365, a
top-rated augmented-reality app for photo makeup with over 100 million users, and Nearby,
a popular app with millions of users for meeting new people. The Kin Rewards Engine
schema dynamically incentivizes dispersed agents in the system to grow the platform, so
6Gathering resources through spot payment instead of deferred compensation is a salient feature of
blockchain-based platforms. Deferred compensation is common in traditional ﬁrms and economic theories.
Note that even in the simplest setting of production where ﬁrms combine labor and capital into output (often
through a Cobb-Douglas function), there exists an implicit assumption that ﬁrms obtain inputs and then
pay workers and investors after production.
A-6

===== PAGE 8 =====

that founders’ eﬀort needs not play a central role after launching the platform.
The use of platform tokens is not necessarily decentralized or blockchain-based. Even a
traditional, centralized transaction platform may see the opportunity to use platform tokens.
Before the Kin project, Kik was using a platform local currency even though it was not
blockchain-based; many community-based companies, such as Facebook, Tencent, Microsoft,
and Amazon, have also introduced platform tokens before (see Gans and Halaburda (2015)
for an excellent discussion). Other notable examples of non-blockhain tokens include those
introduced in online games, such as the Linden dollar for the game Second Life and WoW
Gold for the game World of Warcraft.
(iii) Entrepreneurs’ token payouts and buyback. How entrepreneurs get compensated
through tokens is under-discussed in academic studies yet is important in practice. In the
Kik/Kin example, founders, early investors, and key personnel get tokens which they can sell
in secondary markets. This is a form of seigniorage. 7 What distinguishes blockchain-based
platforms is that the issuance of tokens can be rule-based whereas inﬂation presents a
perennial concern with ﬁat money run by central banks that are potentially under political
inﬂuences. Indeed, many token designs speciﬁcally guard against inﬂation, for example,
by pre-specifying the level or growth rate of token supply. Bitcoin supply is capped at 21
million and Dﬁnity, at 469.21 million. Platforms like Kin also employs more sophisticated
token-supply policies, balancing the rule-based and discretionary approeaches, in order to
optimally incentivize the platform participants and compensate the founders.
Precisely because tokens are used to compensate platform owners, founding entrepreneurs
and designers care about how “inﬂated” the ecosystem is because they care about the
platform’s franchise value going forward. This leads to many platforms also burning tokens
to reduce inﬂation. Kin burned about 10% of tokens during the migration from Etherem
7Entrepreneurs earn seigniorage for building infrastructure for and promoting platform networks. Even
for stablecoins such as JPM Coin and Libra, the core networks of powerful institutions the founders foster
add to attracting users. Key members in Libra are also compensated through Libra Investment Tokens.
A-7

===== PAGE 9 =====

to its own blockchain. 8 Another recent example of the discretionary reduction of tokens in
supply is the Synereo team, which burned 33% of its cryptocurrency reserves on March 31,
2018 after meeting development goals with fewer tokens (AMP) than initially projected.
Burning tokens out of circulation by buying tokens back from the secondary market
requires cash reserves held by foundations or other entities that are in charge of platform
operation. To bolster community activity and maintain the stability of the token market,
TRON Foundation announced a $20 million token buyback plan on June 25, 2019 (one of
the largest token buyback plans at the that time). 9 Its cash reserve was partly built by the
$70 million raised in an ICO in 2017. Such cash reserves comes from operating proﬁts, ICOs
or venture capital backing. 10 Spending cash incurs both a direct cost and a shadow price
that is ultimately attributed to the standard costs of external ﬁnancing (e.g., Bolton, Chen,
and Wang, 2011; D´ ecamps, Gryglewicz, Morellec, and Villeneuve, 2016). In our model, the
parameter χ captures this economic force.
Finally, as in our model, token burning in practice often depends on the stages of platform
development. In preparation for a technical upgrade of its tokens, the Swiss-based crypto
platform Eidoo announced in June 2020 a burning of 28 million $EDO tokens. Binance,
which is a cryptocurrency exchange ﬁnanced by VCs such as Sequoia, burned 2.5 million
BNB tokens in July 2018 (worth approximately $30 million). 11 The company also planned
to burn tokens worth 20% of its proﬁts each year, and then stopped such operation in January
2020. Next, we discuss the discretion and commitment in token supply.
8https://medium.com/kinblog/blockchain-strategy-update-next-steps-in-migrating-to-the-kin-blockchain-aed99e209654.
9https://cointelegraph.com/news/tron-foundation-announces-20-million-buyback-plan.
10Notable blockchain-focused venture capital ﬁrms include include A16z Crypto (a subsidiary of Andreessen
Horowitz), Pantera Capital (a U.S.-based investment fund), Coinbase Ventures (VC arm of crypto exchange
Coinbase), Yeoman’s Capital (active early-stage angel investor), and IDG Capital (angel and seed investments
in Ripple, Circle, etc.).
11https://binance.zendesk.com/hc/en-us/articles/360007242192-Binance-4th-Quarter-Token-Burn.
A-8

===== PAGE 10 =====

A.3. Discretion in dynamic token allocation
The entrepreneur’s discretion is a salient feature of our baseline model. Many traditional
centralized platforms and blockchain-based platforms allow the entrepreneur and owners
to dynamically decide token allocations. While public blockchains assign relatively few
tokens under the control of platforms (e.g., less than 1% of Ether is owned by the Ethereum
platform), many other platforms do have discretion in token supply.12 While many crypto-tokens
have pre-speciﬁed long-run maximum supply and certain rules against inﬂation, the numbers
are often ad hoc. Moreover, the maximum token supply is large and relevant only in the
distant future, not to mention that token burning renders the caps on supply eﬀectively
non-binding (except in extreme market conditions). So its impact on short-term platform
development and user activities is limited. Some platforms do not even have a maximum
supply speciﬁed (Ethereum being the most notable example).
Therefore, not all token supply is pre-set. The Kin Foundation’s Rewards Engine schema
discussed above is just one example of discretionary dynamic token allocation. An excellent
article by Kajpust (2019) documents that in general, token foundations’ operations are
not very transparent, disclosure practices/requirements are only gradually introduced, and
token allocation allows much discretion. For example, as of Jan 2019, Stellar is eﬀectively in
control of over 85% of Lumen tokens. The future token distribution is fully centralized, and
is by no means not written in stone. Moreover, Stellar Operational Fund and Development
Foundation (Stellar.org) manage over 10% of Lumens through the Build Challenge that
distributes millions of Lumens to is proposed challenge. 13
As another example, the complaint of Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) against
Telegram Group Inc. and its wholly owned subsidiary TON Issuer Inc. (allegation No. 74)
describes the ﬁrm’s discretion over the release of unsold Grams, 14 The primers issued to
12https://www.cryptocompare.com/media/1383735/pdfs-termsandconditionsoftheethereumgenesissale.pdf.
13See also https://www.stellar.org/blog/bitcoin-claim-lumens/ and https://www.stellar.org/blog/bitcoin-claim-lumens-2/.
14https://www.sec.gov/litigation/complaints/2019/comp-pr2019-212.pdf.
A-9

===== PAGE 11 =====

investors in 2017 and 2018 explain that “[f]our percent of the supply (200 million Grams)
will be reserved for the development team with a 4–18 year vesting period” and at least 52%
of the supply will be “retained by the TON Reserve to protect the nascent cryptocurrency
from speculative trading.” It also explained that the TON Reserve would transfer its Grams
to the TON Foundation, and that the “founders of Telegram will be responsible for the
eﬃcient use of funds resulting from any [additional] sale[s].”
Related, YouNow, also currently sued by the SEC, has 10% of their tokens (100,000,000
Props Tokens) allocated to wallets controlled by the Props Foundation Public Beneﬁt Corporation
(PBC) and is “distributed by Props PBC on a discretionary basis in the form of grants or
expense reimbursements to developers building either applications on the Props Network or
Network infrastructure, strategic content partners, and other entities directly supporting the
growth of the Props Network or sold for cash proceeds.” 15
Yet one more example is that three million of Polkadot’s DOT tokens, which is 30% of the
total number eventually in circulation, are allocated to the Web3 Foundation (led by Gavin
Wood, co-founder of Ethereum) and retained or distributed at the foundation’s discretion. 16
The key takeaway here is that even though the blockchain technology facilitates commitment
as highlighted in Section 5, many current practices do not fully implement such commitment,
leaving a signiﬁcant portion of tokens under the discretion of the platform designers and
entrepreneurs. Our analysis starts from the baseline model of discretionary token supply
to capture such practice and then moves on to analyze the value added from commitment
enabled by blockchain technology.
Finally, we summarize the four aspects of blockchain technology that are critical in
enabling commitment: data structure, smart contracting, decentralized data storage, and
governance. Then we highlight the advantages of blockchain-based commitment over traditional
approaches (e.g., collateral) and discuss the limitations of blockchain-based commitment.
15https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1725129/000162827918000249/ﬁlename2.htm.
16See, e.g., https://polkadot.network/faq.
A-10

===== PAGE 12 =====

First, blockchain technology entails a linked-list data structure such that each block of
records is time-stamped. Along the consensus chain of blocks, no agent can retroactively
modify the record, which prevents tempering and manipulation of data and information.
The immutability and distributed structure makes blockchains promising infrastructures for
commitment schemes.17 Cao et al. (2018) and Cao et al. (2020) provide use cases of such
data structure in ﬁnancial reporting and auditing.
Second, building on the aforementioned data structure, many blockchains allow smart
contracts, which utilize computer scripts that automatically execute transactions or contractual
promises. Smart-contracting enables certain levels of automation and commitment, without
relying on a centralized authority for execution (Rastegar et al., 2012; Buterin, 2014; Tinn,
2019; Holden and Malani, 2018; Bakos and Halaburda, 2019). Cong and He (2019) discuss
the applications of smart contracting and industrial organization. Chen et al. (2019) provide
a broader survey on the related issues.
Execution and renegotiation of traditional contracts can be costly. Revelation mechanisms
and renegotiation designs rarely show up in practice because they are too complex to
implement using traditional technologies and legal methods as they often require multiple
stages of structured bargaining. In contrast, the future transactions coded in smart contracts
are automatically executed thanks to the immutability of blockchain records. Thus, smart
contracts, when applicable, induce fewer costs than traditional contracting and commitment.
Multi-signature smart contracts are particularly eﬀective in mitigating frauds. For example,
escrow Bitcoin wallets (e.g., the system employed by blockchain-based retail platform OpenBazaar)
are eﬀective in allowing buyers and sellers to commit to transaction execution.
Third, blockchain commitments do not come from data structure and smart contracts
alone. The decentralized storage and governance of data play important roles. Due to
the distributed nature of the blockchain ledger, abandoning historical records, changing
17A commitment scheme is a cryptographic primitive that allows one to commit to a chosen value (or
chosen statement) while keeping it hidden to others, with the ability to reveal the committed value later.
Commitment schemes such as zero-knowledge proofs are designed to be binding.
A-11

===== PAGE 13 =====

governance protocols, forfeiting existing contracts, etc., all require great coordination eﬀorts,
which makes deviations from pre-committed actions diﬃcult.
Whether consensus is generated in a centralized way or not, the distributed storage also
provides greater transparency and monitoring. For example, the uncertainty and lack of
information that aﬄict traditional contracting apply to smart contracts as well. But public
witness on blockchains makes smart contracts less prone to uncertainty in execution and
veriﬁcation of state contingency. It has less interpretation ambiguity too.
Finally, the conventional commitment mechanisms often applied to debt contracts, such
as seniority provisions, restrictive covenants, and relationship banking, may reduce ﬁrms’
ﬁnancial ﬂexibility and suﬀer from issues such as reduced capital market competition and
systematic ﬁnancial fragility. While blockchain-based commitment has its advantages, it is
not a panacea for commitment. The space for smart contracting is limited. Information
feed from oracles and the Internet of Things (IoTs) is still being developed. That said,
blockchain-based commitment does have its unique applications, especially the lack of reliance
on a centralized third party for legal or other enforcement.
B. A model of platform transaction surplus
We adopt the following theoretical foundation for the speciﬁcation of platform transaction
surplus from CLW. Time, t∈ R+, is continuous. The economy is populated with a unit
measure of inﬁnitely lived risk-neutral agents who have a discount rate r >0. Agents have
investment opportunities that occur at Poisson arrival times,{Tn}+∞
n=1, with time-varying and
agent-speciﬁc intensity, λi,t. At a Poisson time, Tn, agent i is endowed with a technology,
ωiF (·), that transforms labor into goods, and is matched with another agent who can supply
the labor input. Agent-speciﬁc productivity is captured by ωi. To simplify the exposition,
we assume that the labor supply has a constant marginal cost of one, and the supplier breaks
even, so the trade surplus accrues to agent i.
B-1

===== PAGE 14 =====

Agent i’s labor demand, denoted by h, is not restricted by the real balance of token
holdings, Ptki,Tn−, where ki,Tn− denotes the units of tokens carried to Tn. Since the focus
of this paper is not on ﬁnancial constraints, we allow the agent to borrow dollars (an
instantaneous loan) at zero cost, so h may exceed agenti’s wealth at the moment. Once the
production is complete, the loan is repaid immediately by the goods produced.
The lumpy payment for labor incurs a transaction cost that is proportional to the total
payment value,υh (υ >0), but using tokens as a means of payment saves the transaction cost
byU (Ptki,Tn−) (U′ > 0,U′′ < 0) because agenti does not need to exchange dollars for tokens,
the required means of payment on the platform. This transaction cost can be interpreted
as the cost of a traditional bank transfer service, the legal costs of contracting. Native
tokens in many cases allow transaction parties unknown and untrusted to still complete a
value transfer remotely, or to contract on simple terms, thanks to the blockchain ledger and
smarting contracting functionalities. For these reasons, platforms such as KIN require all
on-platform transactions to be mediated using KIN tokens.
Agenti maximizes the investment proﬁt, which is a jump in wealth,
max
h
ωiF (h)−h− (υh−U (Ptki,Tn−)), (B.1)
where the last term is the transaction cost. The optimal labor demand, h∗, is given by
ωiF′ (h∗) = 1 +υ, (B.2)
so that the marginal value of production is equal to the marginal cost of labor plus the
transaction cost, υ. We can substitute the constant h∗ into the investment proﬁt to have
ωiF (h∗)− (1 +υ)h∗ +U (Ptki,Tn−). (B.3)
We assume that ωi is suﬃciently high so h∗≥ Ptki,Tn−. The conversion between the local
B-2

===== PAGE 15 =====

currency (token) and other assets can be costly, especially when a lumpy transaction is
required within a short period of time. By holding tokens, agents save such costs.
Therefore, at time t, agent i has an expected gain of λi,tU (Ptki,t)dt by holding ki,t
units of tokens for dt. To obtain a tighter analytical characterization of the equilibrium,
we specify λi,t = (Nγ
tAteui)α (α∈ (0, 1)). A larger community ( Nt) makes it easier to ﬁnd
transaction counterparties. A higher platform quality ( At) makes matching more eﬃcient.
And ui captures agent-speciﬁc transaction needs. We specify U (Ptki,t) = ζ (Ptki,t)1−α, so
the expected transaction costs saved are:
λi,tU (Ptki,t) = (Nγ
tAteui)α (Ptki,t)1−αζdt. (B.4)
We normalizeζ = 1 because its scaling eﬀect can be subsumed by the level of At.
We may reinterpreth as goods or services other than labor, and the investment proﬁt as
a burst of consumption or utility value from transactions. Our micro-foundation captures
are two features: (i) the arrival of transaction opportunities depends on the user base, the
platform quality, and agent-speciﬁc factors; and (ii) holding tokens on the tokenized platform
saves transaction costs for lumpy payments. In essence, we model the ﬂow utility of token
holdings as a form of convenience yield, as emphasized by John Cochrane. 18
We have many applications of native tokens as a means of payment on platforms. In the
case of KIN, entrepreneurs obtain information from consumer surveys that helps improve
product quality. Consumers are rewarded by the native currency, KIN tokens. In our model,
we do not diﬀerentiate buyers and sellers among users because in reality, entrepreneurs and
service providers are often consumers of other sellers’ products in the platform marketplace.
They can simultaneously take on diﬀerent roles (investor, user, developer or operator), and
actively participate in a sharing economy or digital network.
18Please refer to https://johnhcochrane.blogspot.com/2017/11/bitcoin-and-bubbles.html.
C-1

===== PAGE 16 =====

C. Proofs
C.1. Proof for proposition 1 and corollary 1
Proof. We collect the terms that involve Lt in the HJB equation (9), so the ﬁrst-order
condition with respect to Lt gives,
dVMt
([
F (Lt,At)
Pt
dt +dDt
]
+VAtAtLtµHdt + 1
2VAtAtA2
tL2
t
(
σH)2
dt
)
dLt
= 0. (C.1)
Simplifying, we get Eq. (10). The terms involveing dDt in the objective are:
(Pt +VMt) I{dDt≥0} + (Pt(1 +χ) +VMt) I{dDt<0}. (C.2)
Therefore, the optimal dDt is such that it is positive only if Pt≥−VMt and negative only if
−VMt≥Pt(1 +χ). The proposition and corollary follow.
C.2. Proof for proposition 2
Proof. Rearranging Eq. (12)
k∗
i,t = Nγ
tAtui
Pt
( 1−α
r−µP
t
) 1
α
(C.3)
Usingk∗
i,t, we obtain the following expression for the user’s maximized proﬁts conditional
on participating on the platform:
Nγ
tAtuiα
( 1−α
r−µP
t
) 1−α
α
−φ. (C.4)
C-2

===== PAGE 17 =====

The adoption threshold of users is given by (14) equal to 0:
ut =u
(
Nt;At,µP
t
)
= φ
Nγ
tAtα
(r−µP
t
1−α
) 1−α
α
. (C.5)
Because only agents with ui≥ut participate, the user base is then
Nt = 1−Gt (ut). (C.6)
Eq. (C.5) and Eq. (C.6) jointly determine the user base Nt givenAt and µP
t . Note that
zero adoption is always a solution, and trivially leads to a zero token price. We focus on
characterizing a Markov equilibrium with a positive token price.
C.3. Proof for proposition 3
Proof. Substituting optimal holdings in Eq. (13) into the market-clearing condition in Eq.
(18):
Mt =
∫
i∈[0,1]
k∗
i,tdi =
∫
u≥ut
Nγ
tAtu
Pt
( 1−α
r−µP
t
) 1
α
dGt(u) = Nγ
tAt
Pt
( 1−α
r−µP
t
) 1
α
∫
u≥ut
udGt(u)
= Nγ
tAt
Pt
( 1−α
r−µP
t
) 1
α
∫
u≥ut
udGt(u) = Nγ
tAt
Pt
( 1−α
r−µP
t
) 1
α
Ut. (C.7)
Rearranging, we obtain Eq. (3).
C.4. Proof for lemmas 1-3
Proof. Substituting Eq. (15) and Eq. (20) into Eq. (16):
Nt = 1−
(
1−
(Ut
ut
)ξ)
=


1
(ωAκ
t )
φ
Nγ
t Atα
(
r−µP
t
1−α
) 1−α
α


ξ
(C.8)
C-3

===== PAGE 18 =====

which implies an equation for Nt as the unknown. Solving this equation, we obtain the
solution of Nt in Eq. (21) in Lemma 1. Next,
Ut =
∫
u≥ut
ξUt
ξ
uξ du = ξ
ξ− 1
Ut
ξ
utξ−1 =Nt
( ξut
ξ− 1
)
(C.9)
= ξ
ξ− 1N 1−γ
t
φ
Atα
(r−µP
t
1−α
) 1−α
α
=
( ξ
(ξ− 1)ωAκ
t
)(A1−κ
t α
ωφ
) ξ−1
1−ξγ
( 1−α
r−µP
t
)( ξ−1
1−ξγ )( 1−α
α )
.
Plugging in Eq. (3), we obtain the solution of Pt given by Eq. (23) in Lemma 2:
Pt = Nγ
tUtAt
Mt
( 1−α
r−µP
t
) 1
α
=Nγ
t
(
ξ
ξ− 1N 1−γ
t
φ
Atα
(r−µP
t
1−α
) 1−α
α
)
At
Mt
( 1−α
r−µP
t
) 1
α
=
( ξ
ξ− 1
φ
α
1−α
r−µP
) Nt
Mt
= A
(1−κ)( ξ
1−ξγ )
t
Mt
ξ
(ξ− 1)ω
ξ
1−ξγ
(α
φ
) ξ
1−ξγ−1( 1−α
r−µP
t
)1+( ξ
1−ξγ )( 1−α
α )
.
(C.10)
Finally, substituting Eq. (24) into Eq. (10), the optimal L∗
t satisﬁes:
VAtAtµH +VAtAtA2
tL∗
t
(
σH)2
= (1 +θL∗
t )Aδ
t
(−VMt
Pt
)
. (C.11)
Note that under the functional form, Vt =v(mt)Aδ
t we have
∂Vt
∂Mt
=v′(mt), (C.12)
and the ﬁrst derivative with respect to At
∂Vt
∂At
= [v(mt)−v′(mt)mt]δAδ−1
t , (C.13)
and the second derivative with respect to At
∂2Vt
∂A2
t
=δ(δ− 1) [v(mt)−v′(mt)mt] +δ2v′′(mt)m2
t. (C.14)
C-4

===== PAGE 19 =====

Substituting these expressions into Eq. (C.11), we obtain the solution of L∗
t given by Eq.
(27) in Lemma 3.
C.5. Proof for proposition 4
Proof. We should show that the conjecture of v(mt), P (mt) and L(mt) being univariate
functions of mt is internally consistent. In other words, if we start by conjecturing v(mt),
P (mt) andL(mt) are functions ofmt, the equilibrium conditions will conﬁrm our conjecture.
The relevant equilibrium conditions are the token pricing equation Eq. (23) in Lemma 2,
the A′
t-scaled HJB equation (26), and the optimal investment Eq. (27) in Lemma 3.
First, Eq. (27) in Lemma 3 demonstrates that Lt is a function ofmt as long asv(mt) and
P (mt) are functions ofmt. Therefore, if we start withv(mt) andP (mt) being functions ofmt,
the equilibrium condition Eq. (27) conﬁrms that L(mt) is indeed a function ofmt. Moreover,
if we start with L(mt) and P (mt) being functions of mt, the A′
t-scaled HJB equation (26)
is an ordinary diﬀerential equation that implicitly solves the function v(mt), which conﬁrms
v(mt) being a univariate function of mt. Finally, we show that if we start with v(mt) and
L(mt) being functions of mt, the equilibrium conditions imply P (mt) is indeed a univariate
function of mt. Applying Itˆ o’s lemma toA′
t =Aδ
t, we have
dA′
t
A′
t
=
[
δµHL(mt) + 1
2δ(δ− 1)(σH)2L(mt)2
]
dt +δσHL(mt)dZt. (C.15)
Then, we obtain the law of motion of mt in the interior region (where dDt = 0):
dmt
mt
=
{(
L(mt) + θ
2L(mt)2)
Ptmt
−
[
δµHL(mt) + 1
2δ(δ− 1)(σH)2L(mt)2
]
+δ2L(mt)2(σH)2
}
dt
−δσHL(mt)dZt. (C.16)
C-5

===== PAGE 20 =====

Therefore, the drift and diﬀusion of mt are functions of mt and Pt:
µm
t =mt
{(
L(mt) + θ
2L(mt)2)
Ptmt
−
[
δµHL(mt) + 1
2δ(δ− 1)(σH)2L(mt)2
]
+δ2L(mt)2(σH)2
}
,
=µm(mt,Pt). (C.17)
and
σm
t =−mtδσHL(mt) =σm(mt,Pt). (C.18)
Now, we examine Eq. (23) in Lemma 2. The equation links Pt on the left-hand side to mt
and µP
t on the right-hand side. To show that the conjecture of Pt being a function of mt is
internally consistent, we apply the Itˆ o’s lemma to obtain:
µP
t = P′(mt)µm(mt,Pt)
P (mt) + P′′(mt)(σm(mt,Pt))2
2P (mt) , (C.19)
which implies that Eq. (23) is an ordinary diﬀerential equation that implicitly solves Pt as a
function of mt. These steps of conﬁrming an equilibrium conjecture by verifying its internal
consistency follows Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014).
So far, we have shown that in the interior region where dDt = 0, the conjecture of v(mt),
P (mt) andL(mt) being univariate functions ofmt is internally consistent. To show thatdDt
only depends on mt, we need to show the optimality conditions only depend on mt. This is
indeed the case because, ﬁrst, the optimality conditions for dDt > 0 are−v′(mt) = P (mt)
and−v′′(mt) =P′(mt) at the payout boundarym, and second, the optimality conditions for
dDt < 0 are−v′(mt) =P (mt)(1 +χ) and−v′′(mt) =P′(mt)(1 +χ) at the payout boundary
m. At the reﬂecting boundary m, the amount of payout is determined by the necessary
increase in Mt that brings mt =Mt/A′
t back up to m in case of any increase in A′
t. At the
reﬂecting boundarym, the amount of token buyback is determined by the necessary decrease
in Mt that brings mt =Mt/A′
t back down to m in case of any decrease in A′
t.
C-6

===== PAGE 21 =====

C.6. Proof for proposition 5
Proof. The result that investment increases in Ptmt is derived in the main text, and the
results on whether to payout tokens to the entrepreneur or conduct costly token buyback
follow the proof of Proposition 1.
D. Additional comparative statics results
We present more comparative statics results, focusing on the dependence of the entrepreneur’s
value function, investment, and token payout and buyback on various parameters. The
token-price dynamics, i.e., the drift term ( µP
t ) and diﬀusion term ( σP
t ), are stable across
parameter values. Recall thatmt = Mt
Aδ
t
(whereδ = (1−κ)( ξ
1−ξγ ) is the productivity-normalized
token supply, the key state variable that drives investment and token price.
D.1. Platform competition
In Section 4.1, we specify the distribution of ui to reﬂect the eﬀect of competition. As
productivity grows, the functionality of the platform attracts more attention from competitors
who provide alternatives to users and reduce their aggregate transaction needs on this
platform (Ut). The strength of competition is captured by the parameters ω and κ. When
either ω or κ is higher, an increase in At shifts the mass of ui down to the lower values.
In Fig. D.1, we show that under weaker competition (i.e., lower values of ω or κ), the
entrepreneur’s value function and optimal investment decline. Moreover, the entrepreneur
maintains a lower normalized token supply ( mt) as the buyback (upper) boundary shifts
inward. The result seems surprising as weaker competition typically makes the platform
better oﬀ and more aggressive in investment. The same economic force discussed in Section
D-1

===== PAGE 22 =====

A B
C D
Figure D.1: Comparative statics: competition. This ﬁgure shows the A′-scaled value function (Panel A)
and optimal investment (Panel B) under ω = 98 and the baseline value ω = 100 and compares the value
function (Panel C) and investment (Panel D) under κ = 0.62 and the baseline value κ = 0.625.
4.4.2 explains these ﬁndings. A weaker competition eﬀect implies greater investment risk, so
the entrepreneur becomes more conservative in token issuance and investment.
To understand why competition dampens investment risk, consider a positive shock.
Investment raises productivity more than expected, but competition causes a sharper decline
of Ut (see Section 4.1). Likewise, following a productivity decline, competition results
in a counteracting rightward shift of ui distribution (i.e., an increase in Ut). Therefore,
competition weakens the shock impact on token demand and price and thereby alleviates the
conﬂict of interest between the entrepreneur and users (and the underinvestment problem).
Under weaker competition (captured by the lower values of ω and κ in Fig. D.1), the
propagation of investment risk to token demand and price strengthens, so the entrepreneur,
who faces greater investment risk, reduces investment, which in turn lowers the value function.
D-2

===== PAGE 23 =====

Lower \xi -> more mess on higher u (shape of Pareto distribution), invest less, why? conflict of
interest more severe when agents are more dispersed (the break-even marginal guy is more
different from the users with positive surplus, i.e., leakage from the platform's perspective. Can
also see the platform buyback tokens earlier at lower boundary. but overall more agents with
high u benefits the platform, so v barely changes.
Figure D.2: Comparative statics: user distribution. This ﬁgure shows the A′-scaled value function (Panel
A) and optimal investment (Panel B) under ξ = 1.999 and the baseline value ξ = 2.000.
D.2. User distribution
In Section 4.1, we specify a Pareto distribution for ui (user i’s transaction needs). The
shape parameter is ξ. A decline in ξ means a thicker right tail (i.e., more users having
relatively largeui). Intuitively, this would beneﬁt the platform. Indeed, as shown in Fig. D.2,
the entrepreneur’s value function and investment increase near the payout (lower) boundary
ofmt whenξ decreases. However, near the token buyback (upper) boundary of mt, both the
value function and investment are lower whenξ is lower. To understand the intuition, notice
that a lower value of ξ implies not only a thicker right tail but also a overall more dispersed
distribution of ui. As previously discussed, the conﬂict of interest between the entrepreneur
and users and the resultant underinvestment problem depend on (1) the ﬁnancing cost, (2)
user heterogeneity, and (3) investment risk. In our model, only the marginal user (whose ui
is equal to the threshold ut) breaks even, so when the entrepreneur’s investment successfully
raises productivity, the resultant economic surplus must be shared with users with ui >u t.
Therefore, a more dispersed distribution ofui exacerbates the leakage of surplus to users and
thereby reduces investment as the entrepreneur forgoes a greater share of upside to users and
still bears the downside of costly token buyback alone. As shown in Fig. D.2, the decline of
value function and investment under a lower value of ξ happens exactly near the buyback
(right) boundary of mt where the likelihood of costly token buyback is the highest.
D-3

===== PAGE 24 =====

References
Bakos, Y., Halaburda, H., 2019. When do smart contracts and iot sensors improve eﬃciency?
automated execution vs. ﬁner information. Automated Execution vs. Finer Information. NYU
Stern School of Business .
Bolton, P., Chen, H., Wang, N., 2011. A uniﬁed theory of tobin’s q, corporate investment, ﬁnancing,
and risk management. The Journal of Finance 66, 1545–1578.
Brenner, C., 2018. 15 most popular social media networks and sites. G2 Crowd .
Brunnermeier, M. K., James, H., Landau, J.-P., 2019. The digitalization of money. Tech. rep.,
Princeton University.
Brunnermeier, M. K., Sannikov, Y., 2014. A macroeconomic model with a ﬁnancial sector. American
Economic Review 104, 379–421.
Buterin, V., 2014. A next-generation smart contract and decentralized application platform. White
Paper 3.
Cao, S., Cong, L. W., Han, M., Hou, Q., Yang, B., 2020. Blockchain architecture for auditing
automation and trust building in public markets. IEEE Computer 67.
Cao, S., Cong, L. W., Yang, B., 2018. Financial reporting and blockchains: collaborative auditing,
mis-statements, and regulation. Working Paper .
Chen, L., Cong, L. W., Xiao, Y., 2019. A brief introduction to blockchain economics. Working
Paper. .
Chiu, J., Koeppl, T. V., 2017. The economics of cryptocurrencies – Bitcoin and beyond. Working
Paper .
Cong, L. W., He, Z., 2019. Blockchain disruption and smart contracts. The Review of Financial
Studies 32, 1754–1797.
Davydiuk, T., Gupta, D., Rosen, S., 2019. De-crypto-ing signals in initial coin oﬀerings: evidence
of rational token retention. Working paper, Carnegie Mellon University and Temple University.
D´ ecamps, J.-P., Gryglewicz, S., Morellec, E., Villeneuve, S., 2016. Corporate policies with
permanent and transitory shocks. The Review of Financial Studies 30, 162–210.
Gans, J. S., Halaburda, H., 2015. Some economics of private digital currency. In: Economic Analysis
of the Digital Economy, University of Chicago Press, pp. 257–276.
Holden, R., Malani, A., 2018. Can blockchain solve the holdup problem in contracts? Working
Paper .
Howell, S. T., Niessner, M., Yermack, D., 2018. Initial coin oﬀerings: ﬁnancing growth with
cryptocurrency token sales. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kajpust, D., 2019. Examining funding token allocation of blockchain foundations. Medium Jan 22.
Kocherlakota, N. R., 1998. Money is memory. Journal of Economic Theory 81, 232–251.
Livingston, T., 2017. Announcing kin, a cryptocurrency for an open future. Medium May 25.
D-4

===== PAGE 25 =====

Rastegar, M., Fotuhi-Firuzabad, M., Aminifar, F., 2012. Load commitment in a smart home.
Applied Energy 96, 45–54.
Tinn, K., 2019. Blockchain and the future of optimal ﬁnancing contracts. Available at SSRN
3061532 .
D-5