

===== PAGE 1 =====

American Economic Review 2022, 112(2): 650–688 
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20181550
650
An Equilibrium Model of the International Price System†
By Dmitry Mukhin*
What explains the central role of the dollar in world trade? Will the 
US currency retain its dominant status in the future? This paper devel-
ops a quantitative general equilibrium framework with endogenous 
currency choice that can address these questions. Complementarities 
in price setting and  input-output linkages across firms generate com-
plementarities in currency choice making exporters coordinate on 
the same currency of invoicing. The dollar is more likely to play 
this role because of the large size of the US economy, a widespread 
peg to the dollar, and the history dependence in currency choice. 
Calibrated using the world  input-output tables and exchange rate 
moments, the model can successfully replicate the key empirical facts 
about the use of currencies at the global level, across countries, and 
over time. According to the counterfactual analysis, the peg to the 
dollar in other economies ensures that the US currency is unlikely 
to lose its global status because of the falling US share in the world 
economy, but can be replaced by the renminbi in case of a negative 
shock in the US economy. If the peg is abandoned, the world is likely 
to move to a new equilibrium with multiple regional currencies.  
(JEL D21, E31, E42, F14, F31, F33)
One of the most intriguing facts in international economics is the asymmetric 
use of currencies in world trade and the dominance of the dollar in the international 
price system (Gopinath 2016). Indeed, the share of dollar currency pricing (DCP) in 
imports and exports is disproportionately high in both emerging economies—where 
it often reaches one—and many developed countries including Japan, South Korea, 
and several European economies (see online Appendix Figure A3). In contrast, the 
euro (ECP) plays the role of a regional currency accounting for most of the trade 
within eurozone, but almost zero share in trade between third countries. The use of 
* London School of Economics (email: d.mukhin@lse.ac.uk). Gita Gopinath was the coeditor for this article. 
This paper is based on my PhD dissertation at Princeton. I am extremely grateful to my advisor Oleg Itskhoki, as 
well as to Mark Aguiar, Nobu Kiyotaki, and Esteban  Rossi-Hansberg for continual guidance and support. I am also 
indebted to Michael Devereux, Povilas Lastauskas, Luca Dedola, and Fernando Leibovici for insightful discus-
sions, Costas Arkolakis, Ariel Burstein, Giancarlo Corsetti, Javier Cravino, Eduardo Dávila, Konstantin Egorov, 
Charles Engel, Linda Goldberg, Matteo Maggiori, David Nagy, Diego Perez, Mikkel  Plagborg-Møller, Richard 
Rogerson, Sanjay Singh, and Aleh Tsyvinski as well as numerous seminar/conference participants for helpful com-
ments and suggestions; David Baqaee and Philip Saure for generously sharing their data; Viktoriia Berestova, 
Anna Lukianova, Julia Soloveva, Vitalii Tubdenov, Aiaz Valetdinov, and Nan Xiang for the outstanding research 
assistance; and the International Economics Section at Princeton University and the Cowles Foundation at Yale 
University for financial support.
† Go to https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20181550 to visit the article page for additional materials and author  
disclosure statement.

===== PAGE 2 =====

651
MUKHIN: AN EQUILIBRIUM MODEL OF THE INTERNATIONAL PRICE SYSTEMVOL. 112 NO. 2
other currencies is marginal and is usually lower than the trade shares of the cor -
responding economies. Although these invoicing patterns are highly persistent and 
with few exceptions do not change much at the horizon of a few decades, the history 
of the twentieth century shows that they are not immanent and that the international 
price system can undergo major transformations with one dominant currency (dol-
lar) replacing the other (pound sterling). These facts raise several  policy-relevant 
questions: Why do firms coordinate on one vehicle currency instead of using pro-
ducer currencies (PCP) and/or local currencies (LCP)? What explains the central 
role of the dollar? Will the US currency retain its dominant status in the future? Is it 
more likely to be replaced by the euro, by the renminbi, or are we heading to a world 
with multiple regional currencies?
This paper studies these questions both theoretically and quantitatively by devel-
oping a tractable general equilibrium framework with endogenous currency choice. 
I build on the conventional  sticky-price  open-economy model by Gali and Monacelli 
(2005) and augment it with three additional ingredients. First, rather than taken as 
exogenous, the currency of invoicing is optimally chosen by individual exporters to 
bring their prices—which are sticky and cannot adjust in response to shocks—closer 
to the optimal level (Engel 2006). Second, I allow for price linkages across firms 
that arise from the use of intermediates in production and complementarities in price 
setting. These linkages are strongly supported by the data, especially for large firms 
that account for most of international trade, and are important to explain several 
other puzzles in international economics (see, e.g., Amiti, Itskhoki, and Konings 
2014; Burstein and  Gopinath 2012). Finally, the countries are heterogeneous in 
terms of size, inflation, and exchange rate regime.
Solving analytically for the equilibrium currency choice, I show that the model 
can explain key stylized facts about the international price system. Because of price 
linkages, each firm wants to synchronize its price with the prices of suppliers and 
competitors, which generates strategic complementarities in currency choice and 
gives rise to an equilibrium with exporters coordinating on one dominant currency. 
Two fundamental factors—the large size of the US economy and the use of the 
dollar as an anchor currency by other countries—make the dollar the most likely 
candidate for a vehicle currency. Intuitively, the size advantage implies that foreign 
firms use more US intermediates and compete with a larger number of US firms, 
which makes their prices more sensitive to the dollar exchange rate and increases 
the odds that they choose DCP when selling goods both in the US and in other mar-
kets. The  anchor-currency advantage, on the other hand, means that many countries 
stabilize their exchange rates against the dollar (see Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff 
2019) making it the best substitute for a large number of currencies and increasing 
its chances to become a vehicle currency. This mechanism is further amplified by 
the fact that many developing countries have high inflation, which makes their cur-
rencies hardly suitable for invoicing.
The international price system is shaped, however, not only by fundamental fac-
tors, but also by its history: because of strategic complementarities, no exporter 
wants to change the currency of invoicing before other firms do, giving rise to path 
dependence. The hysteresis is even stronger if firms have to pay fixed costs when 
switching to a new currency. This result can account for the delayed transition 
from the pound to the dollar during the twentieth century and the wide use of the 

===== PAGE 3 =====

652
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW FEBRUARY 2022
dollar in the modern economy, despite increasing competition from the euro and 
the renminbi.
I then show that a straightforward extension of the baseline model can be eas-
ily taken to the data and used for a rich quantitative analysis. Complementing the 
analytical results that capture the  first-order facts about the international price sys-
tem, the quantitative extension of the model allows for a more nuanced view with 
the coexistence of the dominant, regional and local currencies in world trade. I 
calibrate price stickiness and complementarities in price setting using the values 
from Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) and Amiti, Itskhoki, and Konings (2019) and 
estimate the two main inputs of the quantitative model—the  country-sector trade 
flows and the exchange rates moments—directly from the data using the OECD 
inter-country  input-output (ICIO) tables with  63  countries and  32  sectors and the 
exchange rate series from the IMF International Financial Statistics database. To 
capture  history dependence, the model is estimated and simulated sequentially for 
years 1995, 2005, and 2015 using as an initial guess the equilibrium invoicing from 
the previous period. Importantly, the only invoicing moment used in the calibration 
is the aggregate share of DCP for a subsample of countries in 1995 to choose the 
value of the fixed costs of currency adjustment.
Confronted with the invoicing data from Georgiadis et al. (2020), the calibrated 
model shows a surprisingly good fit replicating the key empirical facts about global 
use of currencies, the  cross-sectional variation, and the evolution of invoicing in 
time. The share of DCP in total exports of  53  economies with available invoicing 
data is 52 percent in the model against 53 percent in the data. Moreover, the model 
explains 80 percent of the  cross-country variation in DCP, including relatively low 
shares in the Eurozone countries, high shares in the United States and most emerg-
ing economies, and the intermediate values in the United Kingdom and Japan. The 
 cross-sectional fit for the euro and home currencies is even better, exceeding 90 
percent. This success of the structural model with endogenous currency choice con-
trasts with the naïve predictions based on trade shares and the role of commodities, 
which can explain neither the global dominance of the dollar, nor its  cross-country 
variation. Using the granular invoicing data for Switzerland, I also show that the 
model captures the differences in currency shares across sectors. In addition, the 
model closely reproduces the evolution of the price system in 1995–2015, gener -
ating stable currency shares for most countries and a negative trend in DCP for 
selected European economies that switched to the euro.
Lastly, I take advantage of the quantitative general equilibrium framework to do 
counterfactuals about the future of the international price system under alternative 
scenarios. Interestingly, the model predicts that the rise of China and other emerging 
economies does not imperil, and can even strengthen, the dominance of the dollar 
if these countries maintain their current peg to the US currency. Given the comple-
mentarities and the adjustment costs, firms are unlikely to abandon the dollar as long 
as it remains a close substitute to other currencies. On the flip side, the status of the 
anchor currency bears its own risks, making the DCP equilibrium more sensitive to 
negative shocks in the US economy: an increase in the US inflation rate—e.g., due 
to rising government debt or the loss of the  safe-asset status of treasuries—makes 
exporters look for an alternative unit of account and switch to the renminbi as the 
dollar’s closest substitute. Finally, I consider a case where China abandons its peg 

===== PAGE 4 =====

653
MUKHIN: AN EQUILIBRIUM MODEL OF THE INTERNATIONAL PRICE SYSTEMVOL. 112 NO. 2
to the dollar and several emerging economies follow suit, adopting the renminbi as 
a new anchor currency. This counterfactual mirrors the history of the twentieth cen-
tury, when many countries joined the Bretton Woods system with a peg to the pound 
or gold, but left it with a peg to the dollar (see Gourinchas 2021). Under this sce-
nario, history dependence is strong enough to prevent the renminbi from becoming 
the new dominant currency, but it is not sufficient for the dollar to retain its global 
status, and therefore, the world moves to a new equilibrium with multiple regional 
currencies in line with the predictions of Eichengreen (2011).
Related Literature.—There are three main strands in the literature that use differ-
ent frictions to explain the dominant status of the dollar in international trade. First, 
there is a long tradition in economics, going back to Krugman (1980), that empha-
sizes the transaction costs in exchange markets: coordination on a single currency 
raises the chances of a “double coincidence of wants” ( Matsuyama, Kiyotaki, and 
Matsui 1993) and increases the “thickness” of markets (Rey 2001, Devereux and Shi 
2013, Chahrour and Valchev 2021). These theories explain the widespread use of the 
dollar as a medium of exchange but have little to say about its role as an invoicing 
currency. Second, the use of the dollar as a unit of account can be due to financial 
frictions: firms try to synchronize the risks on their contracts ( Drenik, Kirpalani, 
and Perez 2018) and borrow in a cheaper currency (Gopinath and Stein 2021).
This paper belongs to the third strand in the literature, one that emphasizes nom-
inal frictions and has two important advantages. First, Gopinath, Itskhoki, and 
Rigobon (2010) provide direct empirical evidence in favor of this mechanism, 
which allows them to discriminate against alternative theories. Second, it is price 
stickiness that makes currency choice relevant for monetary policy in most existing 
 open-economy models (Gopinath et al. 2020) and so it is natural to use the same 
friction as a starting point to think about firms’ invoicing decisions.
The contribution of this paper is twofold. On the theory side, several ingredients 
of the model come from the previous literature, including firm’s currency choice 
under sticky prices (Friberg 1998, Engel 2006), complementarities in currency 
choice arising from  input-output linkages (Novy 2006; Devereux, Shi, and Xu 2010) 
and price linkages (Bacchetta and van Wincoop 2005, Goldberg and Tille 2008), 
the effect of monetary policy on invoicing (Corsetti and Pesenti 2002; Devereux, 
Engel, and Storgaard 2004), and the use of a vehicle currency in international trade 
(Bhattarai 2009, Cravino 2014). None of these papers, however, are readily avail-
able to analyze the global dominance of the dollar or the future of the international 
price system. Three features of my model distinguish it from the previous literature 
and make it particularly suitable to address these issues. First, I consider a world 
with multiple countries, which allows me to distinguish vehicle currencies from 
PCP and LCP. Second, the model is consistent with the exchange rate disconnect in 
the data and does not produce a counterfactually high correlation between exchange 
rates and nominal wages—the moment that plays the central role in firms’ currency 
choice. Finally and most importantly, I solve for the equilibrium invoicing taking 
into account the effects of exporters’ decisions on each other via  input-output link-
ages and complementarities in price setting.
On the empirical side, the paper complements the  reduced-form evidence (see 
Goldberg and Tille 2008, Drenik and Perez 2021, Georgiadis et al. 2020) with the 

===== PAGE 5 =====

654
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW FEBRUARY 2022
structural analysis of the determinants of the currency choice using a calibrated gen-
eral equilibrium model to explain the global invoicing as well as its variation across 
countries, sectors, and periods. The important advantage of this approach is that it 
takes into account the interactions between exogenous factors in their effect on equi-
librium invoicing, as well as the complementarities in currency choice across firms 
that are hard to capture in  reduced-form regressions, especially given the limited 
coverage of the invoicing data.
I. Baseline Model
This section describes the model of currency choice that is based on conventional 
ingredients and attains a  closed-form characterization, yet is rich enough to allow 
for alternative invoicing regimes depending on parameter values. I keep the envi-
ronment as simple as possible for tractability reasons and relegate the discussion of 
extensions to Section III.
A. Environment
Following Gali and Monacelli (2005), consider a world consisting of a contin-
uum of symmetric regions  i ∈  [0, 1]  . Each region  i ∈  (n, 1]   is a small open econ-
omy with its own nominal unit of account, in which local wages and prices are 
expressed. All countries are symmetric except for the United States, which is allowed 
to be different in two dimensions. First, it is a large economy that includes regions  
 i ∈  [0, n]   and can also be interpreted as a currency union or a set of dollarized coun-
tries. Second, as explained in detail below, the second moments of exogenous shocks 
are such that the volatility of the exchange rates against the dollar are lower than the 
volatility of other bilateral exchange rates capturing the fact that many countries peg 
their exchange rates to the dollar (Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff 2019).
In each country, there is a representative household, a local government and a 
continuum of firms with intermediate goods in production, strategic complemen-
tarities in price setting and the home bias toward domestically produced goods. 
For simplicity, there is only one period,  risk-sharing and  price-setting decisions are 
made before the realization of shocks, and firms adjust prices afterwards with a 
given probability. I focus on financial shocks as the key driver of exchange rates, 
which is consistent with empirical evidence (see Jiang, Krishnamurthy, and Lustig 
2018; Engel and Wu 2018) and allows the model to reproduce the exchange rate 
disconnect from the data (see Itskhoki and Mukhin 2021).
Households in region  i  have  log-linear preferences over consumption and labor
(1)  E [log  C i   −  L i  ] . 
Before the realization of shocks, agents can trade internationally a full set of Arrow 
securities subject to the  ex ante budget constraint
(2)   ∑ 
h
  
 
    Q   h   B  i  h  = 0, 

===== PAGE 6 =====

655
MUKHIN: AN EQUILIBRIUM MODEL OF THE INTERNATIONAL PRICE SYSTEMVOL. 112 NO. 2
where   Q   h   is the price of Arrow security that pays one dollar in a given state of the 
world indexed by  h . To simplify the notation, I suppress index  h  below with the 
understanding that all variables are  state contingent if not noted otherwise. After 
the shocks are realized, households collect labor income   W i    L i   , dividends from local 
firms   Π i    and returns on their assets and spend the proceeds   P i    C i    on consumption:
(3)   P i    C i   =  W i    L i   +  Π i   +  e   − ψ i      i0    B i   +  Ω i  , 
where    ij    is the bilateral nominal exchange rate between regions  i  and  j , which goes 
up when currency  i  devalues relative to currency  j . Because markets are complete, 
the assumption that returns on the Arrow securities are in dollars is without loss of 
generality. I allow for stochastic  country-specific wedges in asset returns   ψ i   , which 
can be interpreted as a shock in the local financial markets with the resulting profits 
(or losses) of the financial sector   Ω i    reimbursed  lump sum to local households.
Firms in region  i  produce a continuum of unique tradable products indexed by  
ω ∈  [0, 1]   using technology that combines labor   L i    and intermediate goods   X i   :
(4)   Y i   (ω)  =  A i     (   L i   (ω)  _ 1 − ϕ  )    
1−ϕ
    (   X i   (ω)  _ ϕ  )    
ϕ
 , ϕ < 1. 
The bundle of intermediates   X i    used in production is the same as that consumed by 
households and includes both local and foreign varieties, which are combined via a 
homothetic aggregator:
(5)  Φ (  {   Y ji   (ω)  _  X i    }  
j,ω
  , γ)  = 1, 
where   Y ji   (ω)   denotes exports of product  ω  from country  j  to country  i  and the home 
bias  1 − γ  reflects either trade costs or preferences for domestic goods,  γ ∈  (0, 1)  . 
Note that when  n > 0 , a positive fraction of global trade happens between regions 
within the United States. As a result, the home bias is higher in the United States 
than in small economies. I assume  Φ ( · )   is the Kimball (1995) aggregator (see equa-
tion (A1) in the online Appendix) to allow for complementarities in price setting, 
which as explained below, are important for firms’ currency choice.
For each country of destination, exporters choose the currency of invoicing, which 
they use to set the price before the realization of shocks. I use a  one-period version 
of Calvo (1983) pricing, assuming that the price can be updated ex post with prob-
ability  1 − λ .1 While any currency can be used for invoicing in international trade, 
it is assumed that local firms set prices exclusively in domestic currency—perhaps 
due to legal reasons. Online Appendix A.3.2 relaxes this assumption and derives 
additional results when domestic firms optimally choose the currency of invoicing.
Government in each country is responsible for setting monetary policy. Following 
the primal approach, I formulate the monetary policy in terms of the target, namely, 
1 The currency choice is robust to the nature of nominal rigidities—including staggered price setting (Section III), 
Rotemberg (1982) friction, and menu costs (see Gopinath, Itskhoki, and  Rigobon 2010)—and to replacing the 
assumption that currency choice is made unilaterally by suppliers with Nash bargaining between buyers and sellers.

===== PAGE 7 =====

656
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW FEBRUARY 2022
the process for the aggregate demand   M i   ≡  C i    P i    as in Carvalho and Nechio (2011), 
and abstract from the particular implementation of this policy, which can be done 
either with an  interest-rate rule or a  money-supply rule.
Equilibrium Conditions  require that labor supply equals total demand of all 
firms:
(6)   L i   =  ∫ 0  
1
   L i   (ω)  dω. 
Produced goods are sold locally and exported abroad to be used in production and 
consumption:
(7)   Y i   =  (1 − γ)   Y ii   + γ ∫ 0  
1
   Y ij   dj. 
Finally, the market clearing in the international asset markets implies
(8)   ∫ 0  
1
   B i   di = 0. 
Shocks that have no effect on nominal exchange rates in this setting—including 
shocks to productivity, government spending, and  terms-of-trade—do not change 
the  trade-off between setting prices in different currencies, and therefore are sup-
pressed for brevity. Furthermore, I assume that monetary policy fully stabilizes 
nominal demand and revisit the case of positive inflation in Section IIIA. This leaves 
financial shocks   ψ i    as the only source of volatility in exchange rates. Assume that 
these shocks can be decomposed into a common global component   ψ 
–
    and an idio-
syncratic  currency-specific component   ψ i   −  ψ 
–
    that is uncorrelated across countries 
(but not regions). The volatility of the latter is assumed to be lower for the United 
States than for other economies; i.e.,  ρ ≡   
var ( ψ 0   −  ψ 
–
  ) 
 _______ 
var ( ψ i   −  ψ 
–
  ) 
   ≤ 1  for  ∀  i > n , which can 
be rationalized in three ways. First, a better diversification of the US economy 
implies that it is subject to granular shocks less than countries that specialize in 
production and exports of a few commodities and manufacturing goods (Gabaix 
2011, Gaubert and Itskhoki 2021). Second, the large size of the US economy can 
result in stronger spillovers and comovement with other economies (Hassan 2013). 
My preferred interpretation of the condition, however, is that  non-US economies use 
foreign exchange interventions and capital controls to stabilize their exchange rates 
against the dollar, giving rise to a global component   ψ 
–
    that is negatively correlated 
with   ψ 0    (Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff 2019).2
DEFINITION 1: Given exogenous shocks   { ψ i  }  , an equilibrium is defined as follows: 
(i) households maximize utility over consumption, labor supply and asset holdings; 
(ii) each firm maximizes expected profits over labor, intermediate inputs, currency 
2 While the exchange rate regime is taken as exogenous in the model, Egorov and Mukhin (2021) show that 
there is a feedback with the optimal tightness of the peg to the dollar increasing in the share of DCP in country’s 
imports.

===== PAGE 8 =====

657
MUKHIN: AN EQUILIBRIUM MODEL OF THE INTERNATIONAL PRICE SYSTEMVOL. 112 NO. 2
of invoicing and prices in each market, taking the decisions of all other firms as 
given and setting domestic prices in local currency; (iii) all markets clear.
B. Firm’s Currency Choice
This section describes the invoicing problem of an individual exporter follow-
ing closely the insights of Engel (2006); Gopinath, Itskhoki, and Rigobon (2010); 
and Cravino (2014). In contrast to the previous literature, which focuses mostly 
on a binary currency choice (e.g., between PCP and LCP), firms are allowed to set 
prices in any currency  k ∈  [0, 1]   in the model. I approximate equilibrium conditions 
around the symmetric steady state and denote the  log deviations of variables from 
the  steady-state values with small letters (see online Appendix A.1 for details).
Let   Π ji   (p)   denote the profit of the exporter from country  j  to country  i  as a func-
tion of price  p  expressed in the currency of destination. 3 Define the optimal price  
   p ̃   ji    that maximizes profits for a given realization of shocks:
    p ̃   ji   =  argmax  
𝑝
     Π ji   (p) . 
Ideally, firms would like to implement    p ̃   ji    in every state of the world. This is, how-
ever, not feasible because of price stickiness, and firms preset prices in currency  k  to 
maximize their expected profits:4
    p –    ji  k   =  argmax  
𝑝
    E  Π ji   (p +  e ik  ) . 
The optimal preset price equals the expected value of    p ̃   ji    expressed in currency of 
invoicing  k 
(9)    p –    ji  k   = E [  p ̃   ji   +  e ki  ]  
and allows firms to replicate the mean value of the optimal price. With the endoge-
nous currency choice, firms can go one step further and target the second moment 
of    p ̃   ji   :
LEMMA 1 (Currency Choice): To the  second-order approximation, the currency 
choice problem of the exporter is equivalent to choosing currency  k , in which the 
optimal price    p ̃   ji   +  e ki    is most stable:
(10)    max  
k∈ [0,1] 
  E  Π ji   (  p ¯    ji  k   +  e ik  )  ⇔   min  
k∈ [0,1] 
  E   [  p –    ji  k   +  e ik   −   p ̃   ji  ]    
2
 
 ⇔   min  
k∈ [0,1] 
  var [  p ̃   ji   +  e ki  ] . 
3 Because of constant returns to scale technology, marginal costs are independent of the quantity produced. 
Therefore, the profit function is separable across markets, and firms choose prices and currencies independently 
for each destination.
4 I assume that profits are expressed in real discounted units; i.e.,   Π ji   ( · )   includes the stochastic discount factor 
(SDF). The variation in SDF does not affect the results under the approximation used below.

===== PAGE 9 =====

658
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW FEBRUARY 2022
As the second expression makes clear, exporters choose currency  k  to mitigate 
the effect of sticky prices and to bring ex post price    p –    ji  k   +  e ik    closer to the optimal 
 state-dependent value    p ̃   ji   . Equivalently, it is optimal to use currency  k , in which the 
optimal price    p ̃   ji   +  e ki    is most stable.5
To give an example, if the optimal price is always  $100 , then setting the price in 
dollars allows the firm to replicate    p ̃   ji    in every state of the world. The choice is more 
nuanced when the optimal price is not fully stable in one currency, e.g., when    p ̃   ji    
can be expressed as  $50 + £50 . As argued by Corsetti and Pesenti (2002), in this 
case, the firm would ideally like to set the price in terms of a basket of currencies. 6 
However, not only is there little empirical evidence for such pricing, but it also 
generates counterfactual predications at the aggregate level and makes the model 
inconsistent with the key stylized fact about the international price system:
LEMMA 2 (Basket of Currencies): If firms could set prices in terms of baskets of 
currencies, then the share of DCP would not exceed the share of the United States 
in global trade.
Intuitively, invoicing in baskets of currencies allows firms to reproduce their 
desired prices    p ̃   ji    and the equilibrium is the same as under flexible prices. As dis-
cussed below, the currency shares in the optimal basket are then determined by 
the amount of intermediates and competing products produced in each country and 
the share of the dollar is bounded by the size of the US economy. Therefore, I 
introduce the second key friction to the model on top of sticky prices, so that indi-
vidual firms find it suboptimal to use baskets of currencies for invoicing and make 
discrete currency choices. In the spirit of Mankiw (1985), Lemma 1 ensures that 
small ( second-order) fixed costs of adding currencies are sufficient to rationalize 
this assumption.
C. Equilibrium Prices
Lemma 1 shows that firms’ currency choice is determined by the properties of the 
desired price    p ̃   ji   . A constant returns to scale technology and a homothetic demand 
ensure that equilibrium prices depend only on the supply side of the economy and 
can be analyzed separately from the quantities, which greatly simplifies the analysis. 
In contrast to the constant elasticity of substitution (CES) case, the Kimball demand 
generates strategic complementarities in price setting across firms, so that the opti-
mal price of an exporter from  j  to  i  depends not only on its marginal costs but also 
on the prices of competitors in the destination market:
(11)    p ̃   ji   =  (1 − α)  (m c j   +  e ij  )  + α  p i  , 
5 Although Lemma 1 summarizes optimal currency choice in a compact form, solving minimization problem 
(10) is equivalent to a pairwise comparison of all currencies: currency  k  is preferred to currency  h  if the  pass-through 
of bilateral exchange rate shocks   e kh    into the desired price    p ̃   ji   +  e ki    is low (see Proposition 2 in Gopinath, Itskhoki, 
and Rigobon 2010).
6 Notice this is not the same as using mixed strategies (lotteries) across currencies. Moreover, the optimal cur -
rency basket is  firm-specific and there is no  one-size-fits-all solution like the special drawing rights.

===== PAGE 10 =====

659
MUKHIN: AN EQUILIBRIUM MODEL OF THE INTERNATIONAL PRICE SYSTEMVOL. 112 NO. 2
where parameter  α  reflects the curvature of  Φ ( · )   and is different from demand elas-
ticity.7 In the limit  α → 0 , the Kimball aggregator converges to the CES func-
tion and firms charge a constant markup, so that cost shocks are the only source of 
variation in the optimal price. The marginal costs of production in country  i  are a 
weighted sum of local wages   w i    and prices of intermediates   p i   :
(12)  m c i   =  (1 − ϕ)   w i   + ϕ  p i  . 
To the  first-order approximation, the aggregate price index is the sum of the prices 
of locally produced goods   p ii    and imported goods   p  i  I   with the weight of the former 
determined by the home bias  1 − γ 
(13)   p i   =  (1 − γ)   p ii   + γ  p  i  I ,  where   p  i  I  =  ∫ 0  
1
   p ji   dj, 
while the bilateral price index combines the prices of adjusting and  nonadjusting 
firms:8
(14)   p ji   =  (1 − λ)    p ̃   ji   + λ (  p –    ji  k   +  e ik  ) . 
A fraction  1 − λ  of firms update prices after the realization of shocks and set them 
at the optimal level    p ̃   ji   . The prices of other firms stay constant in the currency of 
invoicing   k ji   , which means they move  one-to-one with the exchange rate   e i k ji      in the 
currency of the customers. It follows that the equilibrium price system is a fixed 
point with prices determined by firms’ invoicing decisions and individual currency 
choices shaped by aggregate prices:
DEFINITION 2: Given   { w i  ,  e ij  }  , the equilibrium international price system con-
sists of price indices   { p ji  }   and firms’ currency choices   { k ji  }   such that (i) given 
invoicing regime,   { p ji  }   solve the system (11)–(14), and (ii) given prices,   { k ji  }   solve  
problem (10).
D. General Equilibrium
Definition  2 implies that the only general equilibrium objects that matter for 
exporters’ currency choices are the second moments of exchange rates and nominal 
wages. In the general case, there is also a feedback effect: the dynamics of   w i    and   
e ij    depend on international prices, which in turn are shaped by the invoicing deci-
sions of firms. This section shows, however, that under the assumptions made in the 
baseline model, exchange rates and nominal wages do not depend on the currency 
7 An alternative way of generating complementarities in price setting is to assume decreasing returns to scale in 
production (see Goldberg and Tille 2008, Bacchetta and van Wincoop 2005). In this case, the optimal price depends 
on shifts in demand and hence, on prices of competing firms. Despite this isomorphism, the important advantage 
of the Kimball demand is that it allows to solve for prices and invoicing independently from quantities keeping the 
analysis more tractable.
8 To simplify the notation, I assume that all exporters from  j  to  i  use the same currency of invoicing  k . The results 
in Section II, however, apply even under mixed strategies if not noted otherwise.

===== PAGE 11 =====

660
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW FEBRUARY 2022
of invoicing, and therefore, the model attains a convenient  block-recursive structure: 
one can solve for equilibrium currency choice taking the relevant general equilib-
rium moments as given.9
LEMMA 3 (Exchange Rates): The second moments of equilibrium nominal wages 
and exchange rates are independent of the invoicing decisions of firms.
The result follows from the combination of  log-linear utility, complete asset 
markets and the monetary rule that targets nominal spending. Indeed, the labor 
supply condition implies that wages are equal to nominal spending   w i   =  p i   +  c i    
and hence, are stabilized by the monetary policy, while international  risk sharing 
ensures that exchange rates depend only on financial shocks   e ij   =  ψ i   −  ψ j   . The 
result from Lemma 3 holds more broadly and can be derived under the alternative 
set of assumptions. In particular, one can replace monetary policy that stabilizes 
nominal wages with the assumption that wages are sticky in domestic currency, 
while the assumption of complete asset markets can be relaxed to one internation-
ally traded bond.
For future use, it is convenient to define a  trade-weighted exchange rate of 
country  i , which under symmetric trade flows is   e i   ≡   1 _ 1 − n    ∫ n  1   e ik   dk . Any bilat-
eral exchange rate can then be decomposed into  country-specific components 
  e ij   =   1 _ 1 − n    ∫ n  1   e ij   dk =   1 _ 1 − n    ∫ n  1   e ik   dk −   1 _ 1 − n    ∫ n  1   e jk   dk =  e i   −  e j   . It follows from 
the structure of financial shocks that   e i   =  ψ i   −  ψ 
–
    and hence, the  trade-weighted 
exchange rates are uncorrelated across economies.
II. Equilibrium Currency Choice
This section solves for the equilibrium currency choice and shows that the model 
is consistent with the key stylized facts about the international price system. In par-
ticular, I argue that exporters find it optimal to coordinate on a single vehicle cur -
rency, the dollar is a preferred candidate for the role of the dominant currency, and 
there is a  path dependence in currency choice explaining a delayed transition from 
the pound to the dollar.
A. Why Vehicle Currency?
While it is intuitive that firms might set prices in producer or customer currency, 
it is not immediately clear why they would ever use a third currency for invoicing. 
In this section, I show that a vehicle currency equilibrium (VCP) can arise naturally 
when price linkages across exporters are strong enough. The question of which cur-
rency is used as a vehicle currency is discussed in the next section.
According to Lemma 1, the currency choice of an individual exporter from  j  to  
i  depends on the properties of its desirable price    p ̃   ji   , which in turn, is determined 
9 Notice this result does not mean that invoicing decisions of firms have no general equilibrium effects at 
all: consumption, output, exports, and imports do change with the currency of invoicing even though wages and 
exchange rates do not.

===== PAGE 12 =====

661
MUKHIN: AN EQUILIBRIUM MODEL OF THE INTERNATIONAL PRICE SYSTEMVOL. 112 NO. 2
by the system of equilibrium conditions (11)–(14) summarized in Figure 1. Firms 
choose currency  k , in which their optimal price is most stable:
(15)    p ̃   ji   +  e ki   =  e k   −  (1 − α)  ( e j   − ϕ  p j  )  − α ( e i   −  p i  ) . 
To see the importance of price linkages between exporters for the VCP equilibrium, 
consider the currency choice in two limiting cases with no interactions between 
firms from different economies. First, assume the CES aggregator  α = 0  and no 
intermediates in production  ϕ = 0 . With no price linkages across firms, the desired 
price    p ̃   ji   +  e ki   =  e k   −  e j    is independent of prices and invoicing decisions of other 
exporters and is proportional to the nominal wage, which by assumption is stable in 
the domestic currency. It follows that the optimal price of the exporter is constant in 
the producer currency and PCP is always optimal; i.e.,  k = j . Second, consider the 
autarky limit  γ → 0 , so that there are price linkages only between local firms. The 
aggregate prices in each country are then independent of exchange rate movements 
and are constant in local currency   p i   = 0 . With marginal costs stable in producer 
currency and the prices of competitors stable in local currency, the desired price 
is    p ̃   ji   +  e ki   =  e k   −  (1 − α)   e j   − α  e i    and exporters choose PCP if  α < 1/2  and 
LCP if  α > 1 / 2 , but never set prices in a vehicle currency.
These two special cases show that the price linkages between exporters from 
different countries are a necessary condition to sustain the vehicle currency pricing. 
The next proposition shows that the reverse is also true: the VCP equilibrium always 
exists as long as the share of foreign intermediates in production and/or the price 
complementarities across foreign firms are strong enough.10
10 I use the following definition throughout the paper: the region of equilibrium  Z  in parameter space is said 
to be increasing in parameter  x  if for any   x 2   >  x 1    the set of (other) parameters for which  Z  exists under  x =  x 2    
includes the set for which  Z  exists under  x =  x 1   .
Figure 1. Optimal Price and the Currency Choice of an Individual Firm
Wages Domestic Imported Other
importers
Local
producers
Desired price p̃ji
Prices of competitors piMarginal costs mcj
Intermediates pj
LCPDCPPCP
α1 − α
1 − ϕ
1 − γ
1 − γ
γ
γ
ϕ

===== PAGE 13 =====

662
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW FEBRUARY 2022
PROPOSITION 1 (Price Linkages): The region of the VCP equilibrium in param-
eter space is  nonempty and is increasing in the openness of economies  γ  and the 
share of intermediates in production  ϕ , and can be  nonmonotonic in  price-setting 
complementarities  α .
Intuitively, when openness  γ  is high, so that a significant fraction of suppliers and 
competitors are coming from third countries, the optimal price    p ̃   ji    of an exporter is 
no longer stable in either producer or local currency, and using a vehicle currency 
might be optimal. The prices of inputs and competing products that a given exporter 
faces in this case depend on the invoicing decisions of suppliers and competitors: in 
particular, if other firms set their prices in dollars, the optimal price of the exporter 
becomes more stable in dollars as well, making DCP more attractive. An import-
ant implication of this result, which will be further discussed in Section  IIIC, is 
that the globalization of the last few decades—including the rising participation of 
Asian countries in global value chains and the integration of  post-Soviet states in the 
global economy—might have strengthened the incentives of exporters to coordinate 
on a common currency to avoid undesirable movements in relative prices.
Proposition 1 also shows an important difference between parameters  α  and  ϕ : 
even though both strengthen complementarities in currency choice, the  price-setting 
complementarities tie the invoicing decisions of firms within a given market, while 
the  input-output linkages generate complementarities between markets. As a result, 
a higher share of intermediates in production  ϕ  always makes VCP more attrac-
tive, while stronger price complementarities  α  can potentially benefit LCP rather 
than VCP. In general, the effect of price complementarities is  nonmonotonic: low  α  
increases the share of producer currency in the optimal price, while high  α  increases 
the share of the local currency (see Figure 1). The chances of a vehicle currency 
are therefore, higher for intermediate values of  α  when neither producer nor local 
currency dominates in the desired price.
It is worth emphasizing that although Proposition 1 provides sufficient conditions 
for the existence of the VCP equilibrium, the uniqueness of an equilibrium is not 
guaranteed. Instead, the strong complementarities in currency choice that help to 
support VCP can also generate multiple equilibria despite unique optimal choice 
at the firm level. The next section shows, however, that DCP is not necessarily a 
sunspot equilibrium and there are fundamental factors that make firms choose dollar 
pricing.11
B. Why the Dollar?
In order to disentangle the fundamental factors behind equilibrium invoicing 
from the complementarities in currency choice described above, I focus on the 
 flexible-price limit  λ → 0 , where all firms adjust prices  ex post, and therefore the 
invoicing decision of a given exporter does not depend on the currency choice of 
other firms and the equilibrium is always unique (see Lemma A1). Indeed, given no 
11 Online Appendix Section A.3.1 provides additional results about the  coexistence of the PCP, LCP, and DCP 
equilibria.

===== PAGE 14 =====

663
MUKHIN: AN EQUILIBRIUM MODEL OF THE INTERNATIONAL PRICE SYSTEMVOL. 112 NO. 2
nominal frictions, the aggregate prices are independent of the currency of invoicing 
and can be found directly from equations (11) to (14):
(16)   p i   =   γ _  1 −  (1 − γ) ϕ   ( e i   − n e 0  ) . 
Consistent with Proposition 1, the  pass-through of exchange rate shocks into aggre-
gate prices is increasing in the economy’s openness and in the intensity of the 
 input-output linkages. At the same time, the currency choice is still  well-defined 
given an arbitrarily small price stickiness: the invoicing decision of an exporter 
depends only on the states of the world in which prices remain unadjusted and is 
determined even when the probability of these states converges to zero. Substituting 
price indices (16) into the optimal currency choice (15), we get the necessary con-
dition for dollar invoicing:
LEMMA 4 ( No-DCP Benchmark): Assume  λ → 0 . If countries are sym-
metric,  n = 0 ,  ρ = 1 , exporters choose PCP when  α ≤   1 _ 2 − γ   , LCP when  
 α ≥   1 _ 2 − γ   , and no DCP equilibrium exists.
Intuitively, when prices are (almost) flexible, the weights of different exchange 
rates in the optimal price    p ̃   ji    are determined solely by trade linkages. If countries are 
symmetric,  n = 0 , the market share of US products is infinitely small and there-
fore, the weight of the dollar in the optimal price of exporters from other countries is 
trivial. The same applies to all other currencies except for producer and destination 
ones, which have a positive weight due to home bias. Given that all exchange rates 
have the same volatility,  ρ = 1 , firms unambiguously choose either PCP or LCP.
Consider next the case when the volatility of exchange rates is the same for all 
countries,  ρ = 1 , but the United States accounts for a  nontrivial share of global trade,  
 n > 0 .12 This implies that a positive fraction of inputs and competing products in 
small economies are coming from the United States, and that the dollar has a positive 
weight in price index (16) and the optimal price    p ̃   ji    of foreign exporters. As a result, 
the dollar is preferable to any other vehicle currency and depending on parameter val-
ues, firms choose PCP, LCP, or DCP in equilibrium. Figure 2 panel A illustrates this 
result in the coordinates  α  and  γ . Consistent with Proposition 1, exporters are more 
likely to set prices in producer (local) currency when complementarities in price set-
ting are weak (strong), while a higher openness of the economies and a larger share of 
the United States in world trade increase the chances of the DCP equilibrium.
PROPOSITION 2 (Large Economy Advantage): Assume  λ → 0 . Then as long as 
the share of the US economy in international trade is positive,  n > 0 , the region in 
the parameter space with DCP as a unique equilibrium is  nonempty and increases 
as  n  goes up.
Figure 2 panel A also shows that equilibria with asymmetric invoicing can arise 
when  n > 0 . In particular, firms might choose PCP when trading between small 
12 Note that PCP, LCP, and DCP coincide for trade flows between regions within the United States.

===== PAGE 15 =====

664
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW FEBRUARY 2022
economies, but set prices in dollars when exporting to the United States. This is 
because the home bias is larger in the United States than in other countries when  
n > 0 , and more competitors in the US market have prices stable in local currency. 
Similarly, exporters from the United States have a higher share of their marginal 
costs that are stable in their own currency and can choose DCP even when exporters 
from other economies prefer LCP.
Interestingly, the size of the US economy is not the only fundamental advantage 
of the dollar. Even if countries are symmetric in terms of their size,  n = 0 , and the 
dollar exchange rate does not appear in foreign price indices (16), the DCP equi-
librium may still emerge because of the lower volatility of the US exchange rate, 
i.e.,  ρ < 1  (see Figure 2 panel B). To see the benefits of DCP in this case, consider 
a limiting case with no home bias  γ ≈ 1  and strong complementarities in price 
setting  α ≈ 1 , so that the optimal price of a given firm depends only on prices of 
foreign competitors (see Figure 1). It follows that all exchange rates enter symmet-
rically into the optimal price    p ̃   ji    and the firm would ideally like to set prices in terms 
of a fully diversified basket of currencies. This is, however, not feasible because 
of the discrete nature of the invoicing problem, and firms look for a currency that 
can most closely replicate this diversified portfolio. Since the dollar has the lowest 
idiosyncratic volatility,  ρ < 1 , it strictly dominates other alternatives. Away from 
this limit, there is a  trade-off between producer/local currency and the dollar, but the 
DCP region still increases as  ρ  goes down.
PROPOSITION 3 (Anchor Currency Advantage): Assume  λ → 0 . Then as long 
as the dollar has lower volatility than other currencies,  ρ < 1 , the region in the 
parameter space with DCP as a unique equilibrium is  nonempty and, if  n ≤ 1/2 , 
increases as  ρ  goes down.
This result has several noteworthy implications. First, it shows that the relative 
volatilities of exchange rates are important even when they are not driven by nominal 
Figure 2. Currency Choice: Flexible Price Limit
Notes: The figure shows equilibria for  λ → 0 ,  ϕ = 0.5  and (i)  ρ = 1 , different values of  n ; (ii)  n = 0 , differ-
ent values of  ρ . PCP′ (LCP′ ) denotes the region where small countries set prices in producer (local) currency when 
trading with each other and use dollars when trading with the United States.
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Import share γ
Complementarities in price setting α
PCP
DCP DCP
n = 0.25
ρ = 0.25
ρ = 0.5
n = 0 ρ = 1
n = 0.5
PCP′ LCP′
LCP PCP LCP
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Complementarities in price setting α
Import share γ
ρ = 0.75
Panel A. Large economy advantage Panel B. Anchor currency advantage
n = 0.1

===== PAGE 16 =====

665
MUKHIN: AN EQUILIBRIUM MODEL OF THE INTERNATIONAL PRICE SYSTEMVOL. 112 NO. 2
shocks (cf. Devereux, Engel, and Storgaard 2004), and that volatile currencies are 
unlikely to be widely used in international trade. Second, the result establishes an 
important linkage between, on the one hand the wide use of the dollar as an anchor 
currency in the exchange rate policies of emerging economies and, on the other 
hand the dominance of the dollar in international trade: a tighter peg of exchange 
rates to the dollar makes it a better substitute for other currencies and raises its 
odds of becoming the vehicle currency. Finally, notice the connection between 
Propositions 2 and 3: while parameter  n  reflects the total size of economies with 
a hard peg to the dollar, parameter  ρ  captures the tightness of crawling pegs to the 
dollar.
C. Transition
The previous sections show that both the fundamentals and the complementar -
ities in currency choice contribute to the dominant status of the dollar in today’s 
world. But what happens when the two factors work in the opposite directions and 
firms coordinate on a currency that is losing its fundamental advantages? This sec-
tion discusses the transition from the pound sterling to the dollar during the twenti-
eth century, while Section IIIF below discusses the future of the dollar in the twenty 
first century.
To this end, I extend the model to have two large countries, the United Kingdom 
and the United States, and a continuum of small economies: constituting the rest of 
the world (RoW) (see Figure 3 and online Appendix A.2 for details). The global 
economy starts from the point where the United Kingdom has a fundamental advan-
tage in terms of economy size and/or the anchor status of its currency, which it 
loses during the transition path as the US economy becomes larger and more coun-
tries switch to pegging their exchange rates to the dollar. I focus on the choice 
between the two potential dominant currencies and ignore the PCP and LCP alter -
natives. Importantly, I follow the previous literature (see e.g., Matsuyama, Kiyotaki, 
and Matsui 1993; Rey 2001) and make the assumption in the spirit of evolutionary 
game theory that as long as the old equilibrium exists, firms do not coordinate to 
jump into a new one.13
COROLLARY 1 (Transition): Consider an increase in the relative size of the US 
economy or a decrease in the relative volatility of its exchange rate. The share of the 
pound remains above one-half even when the US fundamentals become the same as 
in the United Kingdom. The trade flows switch to the dollar in the following order: 
(i) between the United States and the RoW, (ii) between the RoW countries as well 
as between the United States and the United Kingdom, and (iii) between the United 
Kingdom and the RoW.
13 Although a dynamic model with staggered pricing can be applied to select between “history” versus “expec-
tations,” the equilibrium remains  nonunique (see e.g., Matsuyama 1991, Krugman 1991). Alternatively, one can 
use a global game approach (Morris and Shin 2001), but its application in dynamic settings is complex and goes 
beyond the scope of this paper.

===== PAGE 17 =====

666
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW FEBRUARY 2022
This result follows from Propositions 1 to 3 and illustrates the interplay between 
the fundamental determinants of currency choice and the strategic  complementarities 
across firms. The latter implies that no firm wants to be the first to adopt the dollar. 
As a result, the pound remains the dominant currency even when the US economy 
overtakes the UK economy in terms of size, and regarding the anchoring of exchange 
rates, which gives rise to  path dependence in equilibrium invoicing. Although the 
fixed costs of changing the currency would further strengthen the hysteresis, they 
are not necessary given the complementarities in invoicing. The flip side of this 
result is that the United States can potentially speed up the transition by forcing its 
own firms adopt the dollar, which due to price linkages, would make exporters from 
other countries more willing to abandon the pound.
The model also has clear predictions about the order in which trade flows switch 
from one currency to another. As can be seen from Figure  3, trade between the 
United States and small economies is the first to switch from the pound because of 
the prevalence of US firms with costs stable in dollars. At the second stage, small 
economies start using the dollar as a vehicle currency when trading with one another, 
and trade flows between the two large economies also change the currency of invoic-
ing. Finally, trade between the United Kingdom and small economies switches to 
the dollar as well. Interestingly, depending on the strength of complementarities in 
currency choice, there can be a full transition from the pound to the dollar or alterna-
tively, the economy can end up in an equilibrium with multiple regional currencies: 
e.g., the dollar dominates in trade between the United States and small economies as 
well as across small economies, but the imports and exports of the United Kingdom 
remain invoiced in pounds.
These predictions are broadly consistent with historical evidence—the tran-
sition from the pound to the dollar was sluggish, followed with a lag after the 
United States overtook the United Kingdom as the largest economy, and was 
accelerated by the high volatility of the UK exchange rate after World War I (see 
Eichengreen 2011). While the invoicing data are scarce for most of the twentieth 
Figure 3. Transition from One Vehicle Currency to Another
Note: The figure shows the order in which trade flows between countries switch from the pound to the dollar.
UK
US
RoW2 2
3
1

===== PAGE 18 =====

667
MUKHIN: AN EQUILIBRIUM MODEL OF THE INTERNATIONAL PRICE SYSTEMVOL. 112 NO. 2
century, the recent experience of the eurozone also fits the predictions of the model.  
In particular, the euro is more commonly used in trade between the eurozone and 
developing  countries, but much less so in trade with the United States, and almost 
never as a vehicle currency (Kamps 2006).
III. Quantitative Analysis
This section  shows that a straightforward extension of the analytical model 
described above can be taken to the data and be used for a rich quantitative analysis. 
To this end, I augment the baseline setup with staggered Calvo pricing, heteroge-
neous countries and sectors; calibrate the model using the global  input-output table 
and exchange rate series; demonstrate a good fit of the model; and finally, do the 
counterfactual exercises about the future of the international price system.
A. Full Model
Although useful to build intuition, the baseline model is clearly too simplistic 
to be taken directly to the data. This section extends the setup in two directions—a 
general  input-output matrix between countries and sectors, and richer dynamics of 
prices and exchange rates—briefly outlining the key new ingredients and relegat-
ing the details to online Appendix B.1. Consider an infinite horizon model with  N  
economies,  S  sectors (industries), and  K  currencies. For convenience, in most of the 
analysis below, I use subscripts  j  and  i  to denote respectively the countries of origin 
and destination, and superscripts  r  and  s  for the sectors of origin and destination. 
Index  k  is reserved for currency of invoicing. Firms are free to set different prices 
across markets with the latter defined by the type of good  r  (industry of production) 
and country of destination  i .
Heterogeneity.—of trade flows between countries and sectors is important in two 
ways. On the one hand, it allows analysis of the  cross-sectional variation in currency 
choice. On the other hand, it incorporates the granularity of international trade with 
the resulting values of  γ  in  trade-intensive sectors much higher than the aggregate 
 import-to-GDP ratio.
To allow for heterogeneous trade flows between countries and sectors, assume 
that the individual varieties are aggregated via a generalized Kimball aggregator:
    ∑ 
j=1
  
N
    γ  ji  r   ϒ (   X  jit  r   _  γ  ji  r    X  it  r    )  = 1, 
where   X  jit  r    is the quantities sold by firms from country  j  and sector  r  in country  i ,  
and   γ  ji  r    is demand shifters that determine the  steady-state trade shares and sum up to 
one,   ∑ j=1  N    γ  ji  r   = 1 . Similarly, the heterogeneity across sectors arises due to different 
input shares for labor   ϕ  i  Ls   and intermediate goods   ϕ  i  rs   in the  Cobb-Douglas produc-
tion function. The marginal costs in sector  s  of country  i  are equal to
  M C  it  s   =   1 _  A  it  s       ( W it  )     ϕ  i  Ls     ∏ 
r=1
  
S
    ( P  it  r  )     ϕ  i  rs   , 

===== PAGE 19 =====

668
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW FEBRUARY 2022
where   P  it  r    is the aggregate price index in the market of good  r  in country  i , and 
the sum of input shares is equal to one to ensure a constant returns to scale,  
  ϕ  i  Ls  +  ∑ r=1  S    ϕ  i  rs  = 1 .
Dynamics.—of the model feature a  random-walk process for exchange rates, 
the Calvo price adjustment, and fixed costs of changing invoicing currency. On the 
household side, the optimal risk sharing under complete markets remains unchanged, 
hence the properties of exchange rates from Lemma  3 still apply. I assume that 
financial shocks   ψ it    are martingales potentially correlated across countries and 
that a deterministic wage inflation chosen by the monetary policy is  Δ  m it   =  μ i   . 
Consistent with the empirical evidence from Meese and Rogoff (1983), it follows 
that the vector of equilibrium exchange rates   e t    follows a random walk with drift  μ  
and contemporaneous covariance matrix  Σ  across economies,  Δ  e t   ∼ i.i.d. (μ, Σ)  .
On the firm side, prices are assumed to adjust in a staggered way subject to the 
Calvo friction. This assumption allows me to calibrate the price stickiness in a con-
ventional way and contrasts with the static setup, in which the value of  λ  depends 
on the period length and is not determinate. Leveraging the insights of Gopinath, 
Itskhoki, and  Rigobon (2010); Cravino (2014); and Drenik and Perez (2021); 
online Appendix B.1 solves for the optimal currency choice in dynamic setting with 
 nonzero inflation:14
PROPOSITION 4 (Calvo Pricing): The optimal currency choice  k  maximizes the 
following statistic:
(17)  2 (1 − β  λ   r )    ∑ 
t=0
  
∞
      (β  λ   r )    t  cov ( e it   −   p ̃    jit  r  , Δ  e k0  )  −  σ  k  2  −   1 _ 1 − β  λ   r     μ  k  2 . 
The formula generalizes the currency choice from Section IB, which can be nested 
as a special case when firms act myopically  β → 0  and inflation rates are zero   
μ k   = 0 . In contrast, as emphasized in the previous literature, what matters for 
invoicing in the dynamic setting is the  medium-run  pass-through, i.e., a discounted 
sum of intertemporal covariances between exchange rates and desired prices. The 
latter has complicated dynamics due to staggered price adjustment and can only be 
solved numerically. Consistent with the predictions of the  one-period model, the 
second term of equation (17) indicates that firms are unlikely to use volatile curren-
cies as a unit of account. Finally, the proposition adds inflation as a separate deter -
minant of the currency choice that is only relevant in a dynamic model. Other things 
equal, a positive inflation in country  i  implies that the desired prices are growing 
in currency  i  and hence, it is optimal to set prices in other currencies in which the 
optimal price is more stable.
Finally, I allow for fixed costs  τ  of changing the currency of invoicing; i.e., 
an individual firm switches from one currency to another only if that increases  
statistic (17) by more than  τ .15 Although similar to the menu costs, the motivation 
14 The expression is isomorphic to the formula in Drenik and Perez (2021), but is derived for an arbitrary pro-
cess    p ̃   jit    rather than the one with a constant growth rate, which is important given the endogenous nature of    p ̃   jit    in 
this setting.
15 For simplicity, I assume that the fixed costs are paid in local currency and are a pure transfer to households.

===== PAGE 20 =====

669
MUKHIN: AN EQUILIBRIUM MODEL OF THE INTERNATIONAL PRICE SYSTEMVOL. 112 NO. 2
for this additional ingredient is quite different. As the analysis above shows, there 
are strategic complementarities and  path dependence in currency choice, even in the 
absence of any fixed costs. Instead, the main challenge is that invoicing decisions 
of firms are indeterminate in the limit of fixed exchange rates and are unstable in 
its neighborhood. As a result, equilibrium currency choice can change abruptly in 
response to minor shocks when the volatility of exchange rates is low, e.g., under a 
“crawling peg.” The fixed costs ensure that firms change invoicing only in response 
to sufficiently large shifts in exchange rate regimes and can be interpreted as both 
costs of renegotiating contracts and rational inattention (Sims 2003, Mankiw and 
Reis 2002).
Simulation.—of the model is done in three steps. Although my main focus is on 
the current structure of the international price system, I capture the  history depen-
dence of the currency choice by estimating the model sequentially for years 1995, 
2005, and 2015 using equilibrium invoicing from the previous period as a starting 
point when solving for the new equilibrium. The choice of dates is constrained by 
the availability of the global  input-output tables. Moreover, in the absence of histor-
ical data on currency choice, I have to make a crude assumption that all international 
prices are set in dollars before 1995. The aim is that it provides a reasonable approx-
imation to the late  Bretton-Woods period and plays a diminishing role for later peri-
ods. To simplify the analysis, it is assumed that domestic firms set prices in local 
currency, while exporters are allowed to choose between PCP, LCP, and five poten-
tial vehicle currencies—the dollar, euro, pound, yen, and renminbi. Section  IIID 
below relaxes all these restrictions and shows the robustness of the main results.
B. Data and Calibration
This section briefly summarizes the main sources of data and the calibration strat-
egy, while further details can be found in online Appendix B.2. The parameters of 
the model are calibrated in three different ways. The values of the standard param-
eters are borrowed from the previous literature. The two main inputs of the quanti-
tative model—the  country-sector trade flows   (γ, ϕ)   and the exchange rate moments   
(μ, Σ)  —are estimated directly from the data. Finally, the only targeted invoicing 
moment is the aggregate share of DCP in 1995 that is used to calibrate the fixed 
costs of currency adjustment.
Following most of the literature, the monthly discount factor is  
 β =  0.96     1 _ 12    . I use the estimates of price adjustment frequencies from Nakamura and 
Steinsson (2008) to calibrate   λ   r   at the sectoral level (see online Appendix Table A1). 
The elasticity of strategic complementarities in price setting   α   r   is calibrated follow-
ing the estimates for large firms that account for most of international trade from 
Amiti, Itskhoki, and Konings (2019). Given scarce evidence on the  cross-industry 
variation in   α   r  , I use the same value of  0.5  for all sectors in manufacturing and 
services, but a much higher value of  0.99  for commodities in order to capture the 
 price-taking behavior of firms in these sectors.
The main source of trade shares is the OECD  inter-country  input-output (ICIO) 
table widely used in international trade literature. After making the tables consistent 
across years, the sample includes  N = 63  countries (including all OECD econo-

===== PAGE 21 =====

670
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW FEBRUARY 2022
mies, the European Union, most East Asian countries, plus the RoW) and  S = 32  
 two-digit International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities 
(ISIC) industries (including  2  commodity sectors,  16  manufacturing industries, and  
14  sectors in services). The database has a good coverage with only 2 percent of 
international trade accounted for by the within RoW flows that are not observed 
separately from the domestic flows of these economies.
The ISIC table is adjusted in several ways to bridge the gap between the model 
and the data. Following the model that defines markets at the  country-good level, I 
eliminate the variation in   γ  ji  rs   across importing sectors  s . The adjusted  input-output 
matrix matches the original  cross-country trade flows and sectoral input shares, 
but is different in terms of  sector-to-sector flows. To capture the fact that prices of 
most commodities are determined at a global level with relatively little variation 
across countries, I assume one international market for each commodity, in which 
the worldwide price of the corresponding good is determined. Finally, because ICIO 
tables do not report labor costs, one needs to adjust total value added by firms’ prof-
its. To this end, I use the estimates of markups for Compustat firms from Baqaee 
and Farhi (2020), which I aggregate to the sectoral level, average across years, and 
extrapolate to all economies and periods.
The covariance matrix of exchange rates is computed using monthly series of 
bilateral exchange rates from the IMF International Financial Statistics data-
base. Given almost no variation in their exchange rates, Saudi Arabia and Hong 
Kong are assumed to have a hard peg to the dollar and all members of the euro-
zone have a hard peg to the euro. Motivated by the fact that out of  124  countries 
not included in ICIO tables, less than 1 percent have a free floating exchange rate 
(Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff 2019), I construct the exchange rate for the RoW as a 
 weighted-average of dollar and euro exchange rates. Finally, given the limited avail-
ability of  wage-based inflation rates, parameter   μ i    is estimated as an average of the 
consumer price index inflation and exchange rate depreciation in each economy (see 
online Appendix Table A2). I use a 15-year window before 1995, 2005, and 2015 to 
estimating the corresponding exchange rate and inflation moments assuming they 
provide an accurate approximation to agents’ expectations about the near future.
As mentioned above, the fixed costs of currency adjustment are introduced to 
avoid large swings in invoicing when countries switch between floating and pegged 
exchange rates. As a result, the switching between currencies—both in sample and 
in the counterfactual analysis—depends crucially on the value of this parameter. 
Given little empirical guidance on the size of these adjustment costs, I adopt two 
calibration strategies. First, starting with microevidence, I assume that the fixed 
costs of changing the currency are equal to the standard menu costs of price adjust-
ment. Using the estimates from Nakamura and  Steinsson (2010), Golosov and 
Lucas (2007), and Levy et al. (1997) that firms spend about 0.5 percent of their 
revenues on menu costs, I get  τ = 0.5 − 1 ·  10   −4  . Second, I directly target invoic-
ing moments and calibrate fixed costs to match the share of DCP in 1995 for a  
subsample of countries with available data. Given the initial guess that all interna-
tional trade is invoiced in dollars, the share of DCP is monotonically decreasing in  

===== PAGE 22 =====

671
MUKHIN: AN EQUILIBRIUM MODEL OF THE INTERNATIONAL PRICE SYSTEMVOL. 112 NO. 2
τ  and provides a good identification. This approach leads to a similar estimate and I 
adopt  τ = 0.8 ·  10   −4   as the baseline value of fixed costs.16
I use the IMF dataset compiled by Georgiadis et al. (2020), which provides annual 
shares of exports and imports invoiced in dollars, euros, and home currencies for 
more than  100  economies over the period from 1990 to 2020. I focus on  three-year 
averages as a benchmark, but given the large number of missing values, I increase the 
window to five years for some economies. This allows me to get invoicing shares for 
about 63 percent of global trade in 2015 with the main limitation being the absence 
of data for China. Because most numbers come from customs authorities and cover 
only merchandise trade, I compare empirical values with  model-implied invoicing 
for manufacturing and commodities, excluding service sectors.17 I complement this 
 country-level data with the bilateral and sectoral invoicing for Switzerland in 2015 
(Bonadio, Fischer, and Sauré 2020).
C. Descriptive Evidence
Before proceeding to the structural results, I present a first look at the raw data 
and summarize the main empirical facts about trade flows   (γ, ϕ)   and exchange rates   
(μ, Σ)  . The objective is to visualize the main inputs of the quantitative model and to 
evaluate the role of four determinants of the DCP equilibrium from Propositions 1 to 
4: high inflation and tight trade linkages in shaping demand for a vehicle currency, 
and the  large-economy and the  anchor-currency advantages of the United States in 
making the dollar the top candidate for this role. A reader more interested in the 
predictions of the structural model can proceed directly to Section IIID.
Starting with the implications of Proposition 4, the  much-studied hyperinflation 
in Latin American countries in the 1980s and in Eastern Europe in the 1990s, as well 
as a relatively high inflation in most East Asian economies in the same time period, 
imply that the currencies of the vast majority of economies in 1995 were hardly suit-
able for invoicing and that exporters from these countries were looking for a vehi-
cle currency to be used in international trade (see online Appendix Figure A4 and 
Table A2). Comparing these patterns with the later period, one can see that despite 
a substantial decrease in inflation rates  across-the-board in the 2000s, most emerg-
ing economies—with the notable exception of China—still exhibit significantly 
higher inflation rates than developed countries. This presumably lowered the global 
demand for a vehicle currency and increased the number of potential candidates for 
this role relative to earlier decades, even though for many economies, inflation still 
generates strong incentives to use foreign currency in international trade.
FACT 1 (Inflation): The median inflation rate across emerging economies was 16.8 
percent in the  1980–1990s and went down to 2.7 percent in the 2000s against 0.7 
percent in developed economies.
16 The main results do not change much as long as  τ  stays within the range  0.5 − 1.2 ·  10   −4  .
17 That said, the currency shares for some countries are inferred from settlement data collected by central banks, 
which include trade in services and can potentially be one source of discrepancy between the model and the data.

===== PAGE 23 =====

672
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW FEBRUARY 2022
This negative trend in inflation was, however, largely offset by the rising open-
ness of economies that, according to Proposition 1, helped to sustain the dominant 
currency equilibrium. To show this, I use the  flexible-price version of the model to 
compute the  pass-through of exchange rates into aggregate prices.18 The only input 
in this exercise is the global  input-output table, which allows to estimate the shares 
of labor from different countries in the aggregate basket of good  r  sold in country  i . 
These estimates allow to express prices in terms of labor costs across countries and 
are equivalent to the  pass-through of  country-specific exchange rates   e it   . In particu-
lar, the  pass-through of a home currency shows how much domestic prices change 
in terms of foreign units when the local exchange rate depreciates against all other 
currencies and is a convenient way to measure the openness of the economy: it is 
equal to one for closed economies and zero in the limit with no home bias. I focus 
on manufacturing goods and use imports as weights to aggregate the  pass-through 
coefficients across markets.19
Figure 4 shows the results. As can be seen from the first panel, there is a large het-
erogeneity in openness across countries with the average content of home currency 
ranging in 2015 from less than 20 percent for small East Asian and East European 
economies, to more than 50 percent for large economies of the United States, Japan, 
China, and the eurozone (see also online Appendix Table A3). On average, the share 
of local currency among  nonlarge economies is about 30 percent, leaving enough 
room for a foreign dominant currency. Moreover, the openness of the economies 
has substantially increased over the last decades. The left panel of Figure 5 shows 
that while the average share of domestic currency went up between  1995 and 2015 
for countries that joined the eurozone, it went down for almost all other economies. 
The differences are quantitatively large, including the change from 78 percent to 56 
percent in Japan. Thus, the increase in the openness of economies has largely coun-
teracted the fall in inflation in emerging economies discussed above, and has helped 
to sustain demand for a vehicle currency in international trade.
FACT 2 (Price Linkages): The average  pass-through of home currency in prices 
is about 30 percent for small economies and 55 percent for the United States, the 
eurozone, Japan, and China.
Turing next to the two fundamental advantages of the United States, Figure 4 
panels B and C show the  import-weighted  pass-through of the euro and the dollar 
exchange rates into the prices of manufacturing goods across economies. While 
the euro share is above 30 percent for European countries trading actively with the 
eurozone, the numbers are close to zero for other economies, suggesting that the 
euro is more likely to be a regional currency rather than a global one. In contrast, 
the dollar share is high not only for Canada and Mexico—the two countries with 
the most intense trade linkages with the United States—but also for Latin American 
and Asian countries. Aggregating across all economies other than the issuer of the 
18 Relative to this  flexible-price benchmark, the equilibrium  pass-through in a full structural model can be either 
higher due to import prices being sticky in foreign currency or lower due to local and import prices being sticky in 
home currency.
19 The results are similar for the currency content of exports as shown in Table A4, Figures A5, and A6 in the 
online Appendix.

===== PAGE 24 =====

673
MUKHIN: AN EQUILIBRIUM MODEL OF THE INTERNATIONAL PRICE SYSTEMVOL. 112 NO. 2
respective currency, the  import-weighted average  pass-through is 11 percent for the 
euro and 21 percent for the dollar. Given a tight peg of the renminbi to the dollar 
Panel A. Home currency
Panel B. EUR
Panel C. USD
Panel D. USD + RMB
10
20
30
40
50
60
10
20
30
40
50
60
10
20
30
40
50
60
10
20
30
40
50
60
Figure 4.  Pass-through into Domestic Prices
Notes: The figure shows the  pass-through of home currency, euro, dollar, and a combination of dollar and ren-
minbi exchange rates into domestic prices in 2015 (percent). All values are computed taking into account the global 
 input-output linkages, are aggregated across markets using imports as weights, and include only markets of man-
ufacturing goods.

===== PAGE 25 =====

674
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW FEBRUARY 2022
over most of the period, a more relevant statistic for currency choice might be a 
combined  pass-through of the two currencies, which reaches 33 percent at the global 
level (see Figure 4 panel D). This ensures that in most markets, the dollar ranks as 
the top foreign currency and often surpasses the home currency. The second panel 
of Figure 5 shows that this dominance has only strengthened over the last decades as 
the combined share of the dollar and the renminbi went up for every singly country 
in the sample, including the eurozone economies. The total share has almost dou-
bled with the renminbi contributing two-thirds of this growth. At the same time, the 
share of the dollar remains twice as large as the share of the renminbi because of the 
contribution of the RoW, which is mostly pegged to the dollar.
FACT 3 (Large Economy Advantage): Between 1995 and 2015, the average 
 pass-through of the dollar in prices went up from 16 percent to 21 percent and the 
 pass-through of the renminbi increased from 2 percent to 12 percent.
Finally, to evaluate the role of the anchor currency advantage, I turn to the suffi-
cient statistic from Proposition 4 and focus on the limit of static economy  β → 0  
with no inflation   μ i   = 0 . I define the  pass-through coefficients into desired prices 
of exporters, such that    p ̃    ji  r   −  e i   = −  ∑ 𝑚        χ  ji  r   (m)   e m    and note that   ∑ 𝑚        χ  ji  r   (m)  = 1 . It 
follows that the currency choice statistic (17) can be rewritten as
     2cov ( e i   −   p ̃    ji  r  ,  e k  )  −  σ  k  2  = 2 ∑ 
m
  
 
    χ  ji  r   (m) cov ( e m  ,  e k  )  −  σ  k  2  
 =  ∑ 
m
  
 
    χ  ji  r   (m)  (2cov ( e m  ,  e k  )  −  σ  k  2 ) . 
Without taking a stand on the values of   χ  ji  r   (m)  , which depend on the trade flows 
and currency choices of other firms, one can ask the following hypothetical ques-
tion: what vehicle currency will a firm choose if it does not want to use currency m 
Figure 5.  Pass-through into Domestic Pprices: 1995 versus 2015
Notes: The figure compares the  pass-through of exchange rates from Figure 4 with counterparts estimated for 1995. 
The size of each circle represents a country’s share in world imports. The members of the eurozone are shown in 
red in panel A.
ESPSVBPOLJPNFRASVK
NELGRCESTLUXTURTUN
LTUNORLVA
BGRMLTNLDGBRARG
BRA
ROU
CZE
IRLISRCYP
RUSISL
MARNZL
TWN
PER
COLINDAUS
THAZAF SGPMYS
KHM
VNM
CRI MEXCAN
CHL
IDN KORPHL
GHEHRVDEUITAPRTAUTSWE
DNKHUNFIN
KHM
VNM
MYSSGPBGR HUN
ISLMAR
THACZECRITUN
NOR DNKHRVCHEMEXCHL
AUS POL
ROU
GBR
COLPERPERISRNZL
SWE
PHL
IDNRUS KOR
INDTUR
SAU
BRA
JPN
ARG
USA
CHNFRA
DEU
ITA
ESP
FIN
AUT
PRT
NLDBEL
LTU
GRCHKG
SVK
LVA
SVNIDN
IRL
CYPEST
MLT
ZAF
CAN
70
80 50
40
30
20
10
0
60
502015
2015
1995
40
30
20
10
0
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
1995
0 10 20 30 40 50
Panel A. Home currency Panel B. USD + RMB

===== PAGE 26 =====

675
MUKHIN: AN EQUILIBRIUM MODEL OF THE INTERNATIONAL PRICE SYSTEMVOL. 112 NO. 2
for invoicing—because of either high inflation   μ m    or a low share of currency  m  
in desired price   χ  ji  r   (m)  —and is looking for the closest substitute  k  that maximizes  
 2cov ( e m  ,  e k  )  −  σ  k  2  ? Clearly, if a single currency  k  turns out to be a good substitute 
for a large number of currencies, it has a better chance of becoming the dominant 
currency in international trade. For simplicity, I do this exercise allowing firms to 
choose only among five potential vehicle currencies and show the results in Figure 
6, where each country on a map corresponds to currency  m  and the colors show the 
best choice  k .
The first thing to notice from this picture, is that the dollar is the best substitute 
for the vast majority of currencies in 1995, with the only exception being Western 
European currencies that have the German mark as the closest substitute. 20 Almost 
no currency is paired with the pound, yen or the renminbi in this period. 21 The 
position of the dollar is more ambiguous in 2015 as can be seen from the second 
20 This result echoes the findings of Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2019) that most countries peg their exchange 
rates to the dollar, although the sufficient statistic for currency choice is different from the one used in their classi-
fication and does not depend on whether the comovement of the exchange rates is driven by a monetary policy or 
 nonmonetary shocks.
21 The fact that the Argentinian peso is substituted for yen is driven by a few large depreciations of the former 
and is not robust to the exclusion of these outliers.
Figure 6. Best Substitution Currency
Notes: For currency  m  of each country, the figure shows the best substitute  k  among five potential vehicle curren-
cies with the highest value of  2cov ( e m  ,  e k  )  −  σ  k  2  . The panels report results for two periods from 1981 to 1995 and 
from 2001 to 2015.
USD
DEM
GBP
JPY
RMB
USD
EUR
GBP
JPY
RMB
Panel A. 1995
Panel B. 2015

===== PAGE 27 =====

676
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW FEBRUARY 2022
panel of Figure 6. On the one hand, it loses its dominance among Eastern European 
currencies to the euro and its position among several Latin American and East Asian 
currencies to the renminbi. On the other hand, if one excludes the renminbi from the 
set of potential vehicle currencies, given its tight peg to the dollar over this period, 
the position of the dollar is even stronger in 2015 than in 1995. The expansion of 
China also explains a falling  trade-weighted share of the euro despite an increase in 
the number of countries pegging to the currency.
FACT 4 (Anchor Currency Advantage): Between 1995 and 2015, the  trade-weighted 
share of countries with the corresponding currency as a best substitute went down 
from 44 percent to 26 percent for the dollar, up from 2 percent to 29 percent for the 
renminbi, and down from 41 percent to 32 percent for the euro.
D. Model’s Fit
While the previous section provides suggestive evidence about fundamentals that 
can support the DCP equilibrium, the strategic interactions between firms imply 
that it is not possible to accurately predict currency choice without a full structural 
model. Next, I combine together all ingredients in a calibrated version of the model 
and show that it can quantitatively replicate the key empirical facts about global use 
of currencies, the  cross-sectional variation, and the evolution of invoicing in time.
Starting with the aggregate predictions of the model, column 2 of Table 1 reports 
the share of international trade invoiced in the dollar, euro, renminbi, British pound, 
yen, and in the remaining currencies of advanced and emerging economies. The 
dollar clearly emerges as the dominant currency with almost two-thirds of global 
trade invoiced in the US currency. It is followed by the euro, which accounts for 
another 22 percent of international flows, while the share of any other currency in 
world trade does not exceed 2.5 percent. To dissect the optimal currency choice 
from purely mechanical effects, it is worth comparing these numbers with the shares 
of the corresponding countries in world trade reported in column  1 of the table: 
the share of DCP is three times larger than the total trade share of countries with 
a hard peg to the dollar (including most of the RoW). In this sense, the relative 
size of economies can only explain about one-third of DCP in world trade with 
the remaining use of the dollar arising endogenously. In contrast, the percentage of 
international prices set in euros is very close to the contribution of the eurozone to 
global trade and the use of other currencies is disproportionately smaller than the 
trade share of their issuers. Note that although the difference is especially large for 
emerging economies, it is also significant for currencies of advanced economies, 
including the pound, which served as the main vehicle currency before the dollar.
To confront the model predictions with the data, I next look at a subsample of 
countries, for which invoicing data are available. Figure 7 replicates the plot from 
Georgiadis et al. (2020) showing in the first two bars the share of dollarized and 
euroized economies and their currencies in total exports of countries in the sub-
sample.22 As emphasized by Gopinath (2016), the invoicing share of the  dollar 
22 The results for imports are similar and are shown in Figure A7 in the online Appendix.

===== PAGE 28 =====

677
MUKHIN: AN EQUILIBRIUM MODEL OF THE INTERNATIONAL PRICE SYSTEMVOL. 112 NO. 2
(53  percent) is disproportionately large relative to its trade share (12 percent). 
Importantly, this pattern cannot be attributed solely to the dollar invoicing of com-
modities: the share of the dollar is about  2.3  times larger than the combined share 
of dollarized economies and commodity trade between other countries. The third 
Figure 7. Global Exports and Invoicing
Notes: “Trade” bars show the share of commodity trade and the share of  noncommodity trade with dollarized and 
euroized economies in world exports. “Data” and “Model” bars show respectively the empirical and  model-implied 
fraction of exports invoiced in dollars and euros. All numbers are computed for a subsample of countries with avail-
able invoicing data.
USD EUR Commodities Other
T rade Data Model
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Table 1—Currencies in World Trade
Robustness
Trade 
share
Baseline 
model
Include 
services
Any  
VCP
Domestic 
invoicing
Zero 
inflation
Initial 
invoicing
Flexible 
prices
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
USD 22.6 64.7 60.3 63.6 64.7 61.1 58.8 65.2
EUR 20.9 21.7 24.9 21.2 21.7 18.2 26.0 23.8
RMB 14.2 0.7 0.6 0.8 0.7 1.6 0.9 1.1
GBP 3.1 1.3 1.7 1.2 1.3 1.8 1.3 1.1
JPY 4.3 2.4 2.4 2.4 2.4 4.1 5.0 4.1
Other AE 14.0 5.2 6.5 7.0 5.2 6.1 4.3 2.9
Other EM 20.9 4.0 3.5 3.8 4.0 7.1 3.7 1.7
Notes: Column 1 shows the percent of world trade accounted for by countries with the corresponding currency; col-
umn 2 shows the fraction of world trade invoiced in a given currency; column 3 reports invoicing shares for all sec-
tors including services; in column 4 exporters choose between  13  vehicle currencies; in column 5 domestic firms 
optimally choose the currency; column 6 assumes   μ k   = 0  in all countries; column 7 uses initial invoicing based on 
Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2019) classification; and column 8 assumes   λ   r  → 0  for all sectors. In each case, 
the model is re-estimated for all periods. Advanced economies (AE) are defined according to the IMF classification 
and emerging economies (EM) include the RoW.

===== PAGE 29 =====

678
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW FEBRUARY 2022
bar of the plot shows that the model replicates closely these empirical facts with the 
global share of DCP equal to 52 percent against 53 percent in the data and the share 
of ECP equal to 31 percent against 35 percent in the data.
Given a good fit at the global level, one can go one step further and ask whether 
the model is also consistent with the  cross-country variation in invoicing. Focusing 
again on economies with available data, Figure 8 panel A presents a scatterplot 
of empirical and simulated shares of DCP in imports across countries (see also 
Figure A8 and Table A5 in the online Appendix). The figure shows that there is 
substantial variation in the use of the dollar across economies in the data: e.g., the 
dollar share is around 20 percent in Germany, 40 percent in the United Kingdom, 
70 percent in Japan, 90 percent in India, and 100 percent in the United States. This 
heterogeneity is well captured by the model as indicated by the fact that most obser-
vations lie close to the  45 -degree line. In particular, the model reproduces a low 
share of DCP in the eurozone countries and a high share in the United States and 
most developing economies. Perhaps most surprisingly, it also rationalizes the wide-
spread use of the dollar in such advanced economies as Japan, Korea, New Zealand, 
and the United Kingdom. A good  cross-country fit of the model is not limited to 
DCP and, as can be seen from panels C and D, also extends to the use of the euro 
and local currencies in international trade.
To measure the goodness of fit more formally, I use the fraction of ( trade-weighted) 
 cross-country dispersion explained by the model, i.e.,   R   2  ≡ 1 −   
 ∑ i       ω i     ( π i   −   π ˆ   i  )    2 
  _________   ∑ i       ω i     ( π i   −  π ¯  )    2    , 
where   ω i    is the share of country  i  in world imports,   π i    and    π ˆ   i    are respectively empir-
ical and simulated shares of a given currency in imports of country  i , and   π –    is a 
 weighted-average share in the data. Note that the statistic is equal to one when the 
model perfectly matches the data    π ˆ   i   =  π i    and converges to zero when the model can 
only explain the global use of currencies, but not the  cross-country variation    π ˆ   i   =  
π –   . As can be seen in Figure 8, the statistic is   R   2  = 0.80  for the dollar,   R   2  = 0.96  
for the euro, and   R   2  = 0.91  for local currencies—a surprisingly good fit, especially 
given the amount of noise in the data. To put these numbers in perspective, consider 
a “naïve invoicing” when all commodity prices are set in dollars and the prices in 
 noncommodity sectors are split in half between the currency of the seller and the 
currency of the buyer. 23 Figure 8 panel B shows that in contrast to the structural 
model, the naïve invoicing substantially underestimates both the global use of the 
dollar and its variation across countries with the DCP share staying between 10 
and  40 percent for all  non-dollarized economies and the resulting   R   2   being negative.
Going a step further, I complement these  cross-country results with the invoicing 
patterns between different sectors. Since such data are not available at the global 
level, I focus instead on one individual economy—Switzerland—with a substan-
tial use of home currency, DCP, and ECP and a large variation in invoicing across 
sectors. Figure 9 compares the empirical and  model-implied shares of DCP and 
ECP in imports and exports across manufacturing sectors with the remaining trade 
in each industry mostly invoiced in Swiss francs. Even at this granular level when 
one controls for the country of origin or destination, the fit of the model is quite 
23 Notice this is a conservative benchmark as it takes for granted the dollar invoicing of commodities. Instead, 
this is an endogenous outcome in the model.

===== PAGE 30 =====

679
MUKHIN: AN EQUILIBRIUM MODEL OF THE INTERNATIONAL PRICE SYSTEMVOL. 112 NO. 2
good. Although overestimating the average share of the euro in exports, the model 
reproduces well the ranking of sectors in their use of dollars and euros, including 
a higher share of DCP in exports of food, chemicals, and petroleum and a higher 
share of ECP in exports of vehicles, paper, and plastics. Of course, the model’s 
performance deteriorates as one looks at a more granular level, since by construc-
tion, the currency choice is the same for all firms within a  sector-exporter-importer 
triplet.24 More disaggregated data on trade flows is required to make progress in this 
direction.
Finally, moving to the time dimension, one of the key properties of the interna-
tional prices system is the stability of invoicing patterns (Gopinath 2016). The fixed 
costs of changing a currency and the complementarities in currency choice allow 
24 Decomposing the variance of simulated invoicing in international trade, one gets that the countries of origin 
and destination account each for about 47 percent of the total variation, while sectors explain the remaining 5 per -
cent. Figure A9 in the online Appendix illustrates this result by showing the use of currencies across countries in 
their trade with Switzerland.
Figure 8.  Cross-Country Import Currency Shares: Model versus Data
Notes: Panels A, C, and D show empirical and  model-implied shares of DCP, ECP, and LCP in imports. Panel B 
shows a counterfactual share of DCP in imports if commodities were invoiced in dollars and invoicing of other 
goods were split equally between currencies of the buyer and the seller. The size of circles is proportional to coun-
try’s share in world imports.
R2 = 0.8
R2 = 0.96
R2 = −0.13
R2 = 0.91
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0 0.2 0.4
Data
Model
0.6 0.8 1
0
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0 0.2 0.4
Data
Model
0.6 0.8 1
0
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0 0.2 0.4
Data
Model
0.6 0.8 1
0
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0 0.2 0.4
Data
Model
0.6 0.8 1
0
LVA
LUX
SVKBEL
ESTDEU DNKSWE
POLIRLBGRFRA
ITA ISLNLDESPLTU
TUN GBRMAR GRC
CYP
NZL
RUS
AUSTUR
IAR
MYS
LVAAUT SVK
EST MLTSVNHUNCZEROUNORPOLDNKSWE
CHE
ISLIRLFINFRAHRVDEUPRTBEL ITA ESP
NLDLTU
RUSMAR
GBRTUN NZL
CYP AUS
TUR
GRC JPN KOR
IND
CRI 
TWN
SAU
USA
ISN
IDNMYS
THABRHCAL
ARGPER
KHM
BGR
LUX
BRA
IND
THA
JPN TWNKORCHL PER
IND
ARG
SAU
KHM
CRIUSA
FIN
NORPRT
AUT
SVNCZEHUN
CHE
ARGKHMCRISAU
TWNMYSTHAIDNJPNPERINDKORAUSNZLCZL
BRA 
ISR
RUS
NOR
TUR
ISLGBR
DNK
GRC
MAR SWE
POL
TUN LTU
CHE
ESPROUITA
NLDFINIRL
ESTCYP
BGRFRAHRVCZE
SVK
PRTHUN
MLTDEU
BEL
LVA
LUX
AUT
SVN  
MYS
TWN
PER
MARISRTHA
GHLKOR
ISLBRA
IDNTURKHMARG RUS
CHE
NZL
AUS
NOR GRC
LTU
ESP
IRLFINNLD
ITA
ESTCYP
FRA
SVK
PRT
MLTDEU
BEL
LVA
LUX
AUT
SVN
SAU USA 
JPN
USA
ROVHRUMLT
Panel A. DCP Panel B. Naïve DCP
Panel C. ECP Panel D. LCP

===== PAGE 31 =====

680
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW FEBRUARY 2022
the model to reproduce this fact. The simulated share of DCP is stable not only at 
the global level (see Figure A10 in the online Appendix), but also at the country 
level. Focusing on the evolution of export invoicing between 2005 and 2015, the 
 cross-country median absolute change in the DCP (ECP) share is 3.6 percent (3.2 
percent) in the model against 3.5 percent (2.9 percent) in the data.25 The model also 
matches well the fraction of countries with a rising share of ECP in exports (47 per-
cent against 50 percent in the data), but underpredicts the number of countries with a 
growing share of DCP (36 percent against 52 percent in the data). At the same time, 
as emphasized by Georgiadis et al. (2020), there are a few countries with substantial 
changes in invoicing between 1995 and 2015. The upper panel of Figure 10 illus-
trates this point by showing the evolution of the dollar share in exports of selected 
economies with a good data coverage. Both in the data and in the model, there is 
a negative trend among European countries that either joined the euro area or had 
strong trade linkages with euro economies.26 On the other hand, the figure shows the 
model also matches a stable DCP share in Japan and Turkey, and a moderate positive 
trend in Australia driven by country’s trade with China.
E. Discussion
Having established a good empirical fit of the model, it is worth discussing in 
greater detail the mechanisms that sustain the DCP equilibrium. This section studies 
25 I focus on the period from 2005 to 2015 because of a better data coverage and a lower sensitivity to the 
 pre-1995 invoicing. The  trade-weighted means are close to the medians. See Figure A11 in the online Appendix for 
the  cross-country evidence. 
26 The results are similar for Bulgaria, Estonia, Hungary, and Latvia. Although the model somewhat overesti-
mates the share of DCP in the first period due to a crude guess for the  pre-1995 invoicing, it reproduces well the 
negative trend from the data. A counterfactual with infinite adjustment costs shows that the results from the baseline 
model are driven not only by a mechanical effect of changing export shares, but is also due to the endogenous 
change in the currency of invoicing.
Figure 9. Currency Shares in Switzerland by Sector: Model versus Data
Notes: The figure shows the share of DCP (blue) and ECP (red) in imports and exports of Switzerland by sector. 
The size of circles is proportional to sector’s share in country’s trade.
Data
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Model
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Data
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Model
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Panel A. Imports Panel B. Exports
Petroleum
Petroleum
Vehicles
Chemicals
Chemicals
Food
Food
Paper
Paper
Metals Metals
Minerals
Minerals
Plastic
PlasticPlastic
PlasticWood WoodMachineryMetal products
Metal products
Textiles
Textiles
Transport
Transport
Chemicals
Chemicals
FoodComputer
Vehicles
Vehicles
PaperMetals
Metals
MachineryVehiclesPetroleum
Petroleum
Wood TextilesElectricsMineralsMetal products
Machinery
Vehicles
Electrics
Minerals
FoodComputer
Paper
Machinery
Wood
Textiles
Electrics
Metal products
Transport
Transport
Other
Other
Other
Other
Computer
Computer
Electrics

===== PAGE 32 =====

681
MUKHIN: AN EQUILIBRIUM MODEL OF THE INTERNATIONAL PRICE SYSTEMVOL. 112 NO. 2
the currency choice under alternative values of parameters and shows the robustness 
of the main findings.
Addressing the fact that empirical invoicing shares of some countries include not 
only merchandise trade, but also the trade in services, column 3 of Table 1 reports 
the global use of currencies across all sectors. Because of a larger share of the euro-
zone and the United Kingdom in services, the use of their currencies is slightly 
higher in this case. The share of the dollar, on the other hand, goes down. This is 
expected given the larger role of PCP and LCP in service sectors: according to the 
model, a stronger home bias and a lower share of foreign intermediates in these 
sectors implies that the third currencies account for about 76 percent of world trade 
in commodities, 32 percent in manufacturing, and only 20 percent in services (see 
online Appendix Table A6 for details). Yet, the dollar remains the dominant cur -
rency with a global share above 60 percent.
The next column of the table relaxes the assumption that exporters can choose 
from five vehicle currencies and in addition, allows them to set prices in the cur -
rencies of Switzerland, South Korea, Norway, Sweden, New Zealand, Australia, 
Canada, and South Africa.27 Although, expectedly, this increases the share of cur -
rencies of advanced economies, the changes are quantitatively small. In particular, 
the DCP share falls from 64.7 percent to 63.7 percent indicating that given the start-
ing conditions and the fundamentals, there is little scope for other vehicle currencies 
in international trade.28
27 I focus on these currencies because of their floating regime and a high liquidity—together they account for 
more than 90 percent of foreign exchange turnover. At the same time, the results remain almost unchanged when 
exporters are allowed to use arbitrary currencies for invoicing.
28 Here and below, I solve for the whole new path of currency choice starting from 1995.
Figure 10. Evolution of DCP in Exports of Selected Economies
Note: The figure shows the evolution of empirical (blue) and simulated (red) DCP shares (in percent) in countries’ 
exports.
Lithuania
2005
100
75
50
25
0
20151995
Japan
2005
100
75
50
25
0
20151995
Poland
2005
100
75
50
25
0
20151995
Turkey
2005
100
75
50
25
0
20151995
Romania
2005
100
75
50
25
0
20151995
Australia
2005
100
75
50
25
0
20151995

===== PAGE 33 =====

682
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW FEBRUARY 2022
I then consider the case when both exporters and domestic firms can optimally 
choose the currency of invoicing. Consistent with a dramatic fall in inflation rates 
documented in Section IIIC, the model implies that the share of domestic manu-
facturing goods in emerging economies invoiced in local currency went up from 
38 percent in 1995 to 94 percent in 2015. These changes, however, had only minor 
effects on exporters’ decisions given the low share of currencies of emerging econ-
omies in international trade and the dominance of local currencies in the domestic 
flows of developed economies. Thus, the baseline assumption of exogenous PCP in 
local sales provides a good approximation to the equilibrium invoicing in 2015 and, 
as can be seen from column 5 of Table 1, is almost inconsequential for the currency 
shares in international trade.
Similarly, column 6 shows that the currency shares remain largely unchanged if 
one assumes zero inflation across economies. This result should be interpreted with 
caution as it only holds because of the initial guess that all exporters set their prices 
in dollars and there are both fixed costs and complementarities that make switching 
to currencies of emerging economies suboptimal even in a  low-inflation case. In 
other words, the high inflation of the 1990s confirms the status quo. If instead one 
assumes PCP or LCP in the  pre-1995 period, the inflation substantially changes the 
currency choice of exporters and makes them switch to vehicle currencies. To further 
evaluate the role of the initial currency choice, I consider the case when exporters 
set prices in anchor currencies of their economies as defined by Ilzetzki, Reinhart, 
and Rogoff (2019) for year 1995. Expectedly, this increases the share of currencies 
of developed economies and lowers the share of the dollar (see column 7). Yet, even 
in this case, the dominance of the US currency remains undisputed. Interestingly, if 
one assumes instead that all export prices except for commodities are set in euros 
(German mark) before 1995, then in 2015 the share of DCP is 53.2 percent and the 
share of the ECP is 28.5 percent. This shows that although the  history dependence 
enhances the role of the dollar and especially so in the commodity sectors, it is 
the fundamental  anchor-currency advantage of the United States that ensures that 
its currency dominates the euro in world trade, even if the initial conditions work 
against the dollar.
Finally, to disentangle the role of fundamental factors and the complementarities 
in currency choice, I consider the  flexible-price limit   λ   r  → 0 . Perhaps surprisingly, 
column  8 shows that the dollar and the euro further crowd out other currencies 
relative to the baseline case. Intuitively, there are two effects of greater price flexi-
bility: on the one hand, it lowers the invoicing complementarities across exporters, 
which dampens the role of vehicle currencies. On the other hand, it also lowers the 
complementarities between domestic firms and exporters, which helps to support 
the DCP equilibrium. The latter effect dominates in the calibrated model, although 
quantitatively the net effect is close to zero, meaning that equilibrium invoicing is 
robust to a wide range of price stickiness.29
29 This result is not driven by the fixed costs of currency adjustment. First, the costs are normalized by   λ   r   and 
go to zero in the limit of flexible prices (see online Appendix B.2.3). Second, a simulation with zero fixed costs 
confirms that the DCP share is higher under flexible prices.

===== PAGE 34 =====

683
MUKHIN: AN EQUILIBRIUM MODEL OF THE INTERNATIONAL PRICE SYSTEMVOL. 112 NO. 2
F. Future of the Dollar
After making sure that the equilibrium invoicing matches closely the current use 
of currencies in world trade, I next take full advantage of the general equilibrium 
structure of the model to do counterfactual analysis about the future evolution of 
the international price system. This section evaluates the effect of economic growth, 
exchange rate regimes, and monetary policy on the prospects of the renminbi to 
replace the dollar as a global currency.
The first counterfactual focuses on the growing role of China in world econ-
omy and asks how much the use of currencies will change 20 years from now, 
by year 2035, if countries continue to grow at their current rates. To answer this 
question, I compute future bilateral trade flows   { γ  ji  r  }   using a standard structural 
gravity model from the international trade literature (Eaton and Kortum 2002; see 
online Appendix B.3 for details). The growth rates are estimated at the country level 
using the actual values for 2016–2019 and the IMF forecasts for 2020–2025 and 
are extrapolated for the whole horizon of twenty years. Importantly, this scenario 
assumes no changes in other parameters—including inflation rates and exchange 
rate covariances—keeping them at the 2001–2015 level.
The second bar in Figure 11 shows the results. Interestingly, the model predicts 
that if anything, the increasing role of China and other emerging economies in the 
world economy strengthens the dominance of the dollar, shrinking the share of the 
euro, and leaving the share of the renminbi and other currencies close to zero. This is 
because there are almost no changes in currency choice and all dynamics are driven 
by the composition effect—the contribution of emerging economies to world trade 
goes up and the share of the Eurozone in world economy falls. Thus, the fixed costs 
and complementarities in currency choice are strong enough to prevent exporters 
from switching to the renminbi even when the share of China in world manufac-
turing exports rises from 19 percent to 23 percent and its home bias goes up from 
91 percent to 93 percent. Notice there is no contradiction between this result and 
Corollary 1: the peg to the dollar in several emerging economies including China 
implies that the effective share of the dollarized countries in world economy is 
increasing, promoting the status of DCP.
To better understand the role of the exchange rate policy, consider the second 
counterfactual, which assumes that China abandons foreign exchange interven-
tions and switches to a floating regime. While it is hard to predict the properties of 
the renminbi exchange rate without government interventions, I assume that once 
expressed against a bundle of floating currencies, it has a zero correlation with 
other exchange rates and the same volatility as the US dollar. 30 The trade flows 
and other parameters take the same values as in 2015. The third bar in Figure 11 
shows that the equilibrium share of the renminbi is significantly larger in this case: 
a higher volatility of the Chinese exchange rate against the dollar breaks the iso-
morphism between the two currencies and makes firms reconsider their currency 
choice. As a result, some trade flows to and from China switch to the renminbi 
invoicing. At the same time, the share of Chinese currency remains lower than the 
30 Indeed, once expressed in this way, the average correlation of each floating currency with the others is close 
to zero.

===== PAGE 35 =====

684
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW FEBRUARY 2022
country’s  contribution to world trade ( 11 percent against 14 percent)  and the ren-
minbi is almost never used as a vehicle currency between third countries.
The previous counterfactual makes a conservative assumption that keeps most 
currencies pegged to the dollar and to the euro after China switches to a floating 
regime. One can argue instead that developing countries are likely to adopt the ren-
minbi as an anchor currency in their exchange rate policy in response to its rising 
role in international goods and financial markets (see, e.g., Egorov and  Mukhin 
2021). The next counterfactual considers such a possibility and switches the posi-
tions of the renminbi and the dollar in the exchange rate covariance matrix. 31 In 
this case, the share of Chinese currency reaches 18 percent exceeding the country’s 
contribution to world trade, while the share of DCP falls to 38 percent and the share 
of ECP rises slightly to 25 percent (see the fourth bar in Figure 11). Although the 
renminbi also gains the status of a vehicle currency in trade between some countries, 
the dollar retains its status of the main vehicle currency. Thus, the history depen-
dence is strong enough to prevent the renminbi from becoming the new dominant 
currency, but is not sufficient for the dollar to remain the only global currency. The 
world in this case features several regional currencies in line with the predictions of 
Eichengreen (2011).
Finally, I consider the case when the evolution of the international price system 
is driven by changes in the US economy rather than in the rest of the world. In 
particular, assume that US inflation goes up to 10 percent with no other changes in 
the world economy relative to the year 2015. Such a shock can be a consequence of 
the rising government debt burden and the inability of the fiscal authorities to raise 
enough taxes to finance it. Alternatively, one can consider a shock to the  safe-asset 
status of US bonds and the resulting depreciation of the exchange rate (Farhi and 
Maggiori 2018), which has similar implications for the equilibrium invoicing (see 
31 In particular, I assume that the covariances between the renminbi and other currencies become the same as 
they are for the dollar in 2015, while the covariance of the dollar with other exchange rates is zero.
Figure 11. Counterfactual Currency Shares in World Trade
Notes: The bars show the  model-implied shares of the main vehicle currencies in world trade (i) in 2015, (ii) under 
the predicted trade flows in 2035, (iii) if China adopts a floating exchange rate regime, (iv) if the renminbi replaces 
the dollar as an anchor currency for other economies, and (v) if the US inflation goes up to 10 percent per year.
2015 Growth by 2035 Floating RMB Pegs to RMB US inflation
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
USD EUR RMB Other
0.2
0

===== PAGE 36 =====

685
MUKHIN: AN EQUILIBRIUM MODEL OF THE INTERNATIONAL PRICE SYSTEMVOL. 112 NO. 2
Corollary 1). The last bar in Figure 11 shows that the share of DCP falls dramati-
cally to 15 percent, the share of ECP goes up to 28 percent, and the Chinese currency 
emerges as the dominant currency accounting for 37 percent of international trade. 
In fact, only commodities with flexible prices remain invoiced in dollars in this case. 
Intuitively, an increase in US inflation makes exporters look for an alternative unit 
of account and although the use of most currencies goes up, the gains are especially 
high for the renminbi, which is the closest substitute to the dollar.
To summarize, there are three main  takeaways about the future of the dollar. First, 
the rise of China and other emerging economies does not put at risk and can even 
strengthen the dominance of the dollar as long as these countries stay pegged to the 
US currency. Second, the dollar is more likely to lose its global status if US inflation 
goes out of control, suggesting that the internal problems of the US economy are 
more damaging for the dominance of the dollar than external factors. Moreover, in 
this scenario, the anchor status works against the dollar as it simplifies the transition 
to the renminbi. Finally, the model suggests that the dominance of one currency 
in today’s world is due to a particular combination of the previous history, when 
there were no good alternatives to the dollar, and the current fundamentals, with 
many emerging economies pegging their exchange rates to the dollar. If the peg is 
abandoned, the world is likely to move to a new equilibrium with multiple regional 
currencies rather than to switch to a new global currency. However, the PCP/LCP 
equilibrium with symmetric use of currencies in world trade is still unlikely because 
of the complementarities in currency choice and the high volatility of emerging 
economies.
IV . Conclusion
This paper provides a general equilibrium framework of the international price 
system that can be used to study analytically and quantitatively the use of curren-
cies in world trade. The model is broadly consistent with the key empirical facts, 
including the dominant status of the dollar in global trade, a large heterogeneity of 
invoicing across economies, and delayed transition from one dominant currency to 
another. A calibrated version of the model shows that high inflation and volatility in 
emerging economies create global demand for a vehicle currency, which is further 
amplified by strategic complementarities in currency choice. The large size of the 
US economy and a widespread peg to the dollar among other countries naturally 
make the US currency the leading candidate for the role of the global currency. 
While the increasing role of China in the world economy and its drift toward a float-
ing regime can undermine the dominance of the dollar in the future, it is unlikely to 
fully replace it on the global stage.
The tractability of the baseline model allows for several extensions and appli-
cations, which are left for future research. First, although the use of the world 
 input-output table and exchange rate covariance matrix allows me to match the 
global and  cross-country invoicing patterns from the data, more granular data on 
 inter-firm linkages can greatly improve the model’s predictions at a more disaggre-
gated level (Amiti, Itskhoki, and Konings 2020). More empirical evidence is also 
required regarding the size of the fixed costs of currency adjustment (Crowley, Han, 
and Son 2020). Second, augmenting the model with a more realistic financial sector 

===== PAGE 37 =====

686
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW FEBRUARY 2022
and gross capital flows would allow analyzing the interactions between the domi-
nant status of the dollar as a vehicle currency in international trade and as a reserve 
currency in global asset markets (Bahaj and Reis 2020). Third, the framework lends 
itself to a variety of counterfactuals and policy experiments. This paper makes the 
first step in this direction, leaving for future analysis many interesting experiments, 
such as the invoicing implications of joining the eurozone. Finally, the counterfac-
tual analysis shows that the future of the international price system depends heavily 
on the status of the dollar as the main anchor currency. More work is required to 
understand how countries choose the exchange rate regime, how it interacts with 
the other roles of the dollar, and how it is going to change in the future (Gourinchas 
2021).
REFERENCES
Allen, Treb, Costas Arkolakis, and Yuta Takahashi. 2020. “Universal Gravity.” Journal of Political 
Economy 128 (2): 393–433. 
Alvarez, Fernando, Martin Beraja, Martín Gonzalez-Rozada, and Pablo  Andrés Neumeyer. 2019. 
“From Hyperinflation to Stable Prices: Argentina’s Evidence on Menu Cost Models.” Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 134 (1): 451–505. 
Amiti, Mary, Oleg Itskhoki, and Jozef Konings. 2014. “Importers, Exporters, and Exchange Rate Dis-
connect.” American Economic Review 7 (104): 1942–78. 
Amiti, Mary, Oleg Itskhoki, and Jozef Konings. 2019. “International Shocks, Variable Markups and 
Domestic Prices.” Review of Economic Studies 86 (6): 2356–2402.
Amiti, Mary, Oleg Itskhoki, and Jozef Konings. 2020. “Dominant Currencies: How Firms Choose Cur-
rency Invoicing and Why it Matters.” NBER Working Paper 27926. 
Ascari, Guido, and Argia M. Sbordone. 2014. “The Macroeconomics of Trend Inflation.” Journal of 
Economic Literature 52 (3): 679–739. 
Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop. 2005. “A Theory of the Currency Denomination of Inter-
national Trade.” Journal of International Economics 67 (2): 295–319. 
Bahaj, Saleem, and Ricardo Reis. 2020. “Jumpstarting an International Currency.” CEPR Discussion 
Paper 14793. 
Baqaee, David Rezza, and Emmanuel Farhi. 2020. “Productivity and Misallocation in General Equi-
librium.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (1): 105–63. 
Bhattarai, Saroj. 2009. “Optimal Currency Denomination of Trade: Theory and Quantitative Explo-
ration.” Unpublished. 
Bonadio, Barthélémy, Andreas  M. Fischer, and Philip Sauré. 2020. “The Speed of Exchange Rate 
Pass-through.” Journal of the European Economic Association 18 (1): 506–38. 
Boz, Emine, Camila Casas, Georgios Georgiadis, Gita Gopinath, Helena Le Mezo, Arnaud Mehl, and 
Tra Nguyen. 2020. “Patterns in Invoicing Currency in Global Trade.” IMF Working Paper 20/126.
Burstein, Ariel  T., and Gita Gopinath. 2012. “International Prices and Exchange Rates.” In Hand-
book of International Economics, V ol. 4, edited by Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman and Kenneth 
Rogoff, 391–451. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Caliendo, Lorenzo, and Fernando Parro. 2015. “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of 
NAFTA.” Review of Economic Studies 82 (1): 1–44. 
Calvo, Guillermo A. 1983. “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework.” Journal of Mone-
tary Economics 12 (3): 383–98. 
Carvalho, Carlos, and Fernanda Nechio. 2011. “Aggregation and the PPP Puzzle in a Sticky-Price 
Model.” American Economic Review 101 (6): 2391–2424. 
Chahrour, Ryan, and Rosen Valchev. 2021. “Trade Finance and the Durability of the Dollar.” Boston 
College Working Paper 934. 
Corsetti, Giancarlo, and Paolo Pesenti. 2002. “Self-Validating Optimum Currency Areas.” NBER 
Working Paper 8783. 
Cravino, Javier. 2014. “Exchange Rates, Aggregate Productivity and the Currency of Invoicing of 
International Trade.” Unpublished. 
Crowley, Meredith A., Lu Han, and Minkyu Son. 2020. “Dominant Currency Dynamics: Evidence on 
Dollar-Invoicing from UK Exporters.” CEPR Discussion Paper 15493. 

===== PAGE 38 =====

687
MUKHIN: AN EQUILIBRIUM MODEL OF THE INTERNATIONAL PRICE SYSTEMVOL. 112 NO. 2
Dekle, Robert, Jonathan Eaton, and Samuel Kortum. 2007. “Unbalanced Trade.” American Economic 
Review 97 (2): 351–55. 
Devereux, Michael B., and Shouyong Shi. 2013. “Vehicle Currency.” International Economic Review 
54 (1): 97–133. 
Devereux, Michael B., Kang Shi, and Juanyi Xu. 2010. “Oil Currency and the Dollar Standard: A Sim-
ple Analytical Model of an International Trade Currency.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 
42 (4): 521–50. 
Devereux, Michael, Charles Engel, and Peter Storgaard. 2004. “Endogenous Pass-through When 
Nominal Prices Are Set in Advance.” Journal of International Economics 63 (2): 263–91. 
Drenik, Andres, Rishabh Kirpalani, and Diego Perez. 2018. “Currency Choice in Contracts.” 
 Unpublished. 
Drenik, Andres, and Diego J. Perez. 2021. “Domestic Price Dollarization in Emerging Economies.” 
Journal of Monetary Economics 122: 38–55.
Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum. 2002. “Technology, Geography, and Trade.” Econometrica  
70 (5): 1741–79. 
Egorov, Konstantin, and Dmitry Mukhin. 2021. “Optimal Policy under Dollar Pricing.” Unpublished. 
Eichengreen, Barry. 2011. Exorbitant Privilege: The Rise and Fall of the Dollar and the Future of the 
International Monetary System. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Engel, Charles. 2006. “Equivalence Results for Optimal Pass-through, Optimal Indexing to Exchange 
Rates, and Optimal Choice of Currency for Export Pricing.” Journal of European Economic Asso-
ciation 4 (6): 1249–60. 
Engel, Charles, and Steve Pak Yeung Wu. 2018. “Liquidity and Exchange Rates: An Empirical Inves-
tigation.” NBER Working Paper 25397. 
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Matteo Maggiori. 2018. “A Model of the International Monetary System.” 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (1): 295–355.
Friberg, Richard. 1998. “In Which Currency Should Exporters Set Their Prices?” Journal of Interna-
tional Economics 45 (1): 59–76. 
Friberg, Richard, and Fredrik Wilander. 2008. “The Currency Denomination of Exports - A Question-
naire Study.” Journal of International Economics 75 (1): 54–69. 
Gabaix, Xavier. 2011. “The Granular Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations.” Econometrica 79 (3):  733–72. 
Gali, Jordi, and Tommaso Monacelli. 2005. “Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate V olatility in a Small 
Open Economy.” Review of Economic Studies 72 (3): 707–34. 
Gaubert, Cecile, and Oleg Itskhoki. 2021. “Granular Comparative Advantage.” Journal of Political 
Economy 129 (3): 871–939. 
Georgiadis, Georgios, Helena Le Mezo, Arnaud Mehld, and Cédric Tille. 2021. “Fundamentals vs. 
Policies: Can the US Dollar’s Dominance in Global Trade Be Dented?” European Central Bank 
Working Paper 2574. 
Goldberg, Linda S., and Cédric Tille. 2008. “Vehicle Currency Use in International Trade.” Journal of 
International Economics 76 (2): 177–92. 
Golosov, Mikhail, and Robert E. Lucas Jr. 2007. “Menu Costs and Phillips Curves.” Journal of Polit-
ical Economy 115 (2): 171–99. 
Gopinath, Gita. 2015. “The International Price System.” Paper presented at the Inflation Dynamics and 
Monetary Policy Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY , August 28.
Gopinath, Gita, Emine Boz, Camila Casas, Federico  J. Díez, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, and Mik-
kel Plagborg-Møller. 2020. “Dominant Currency Paradigm.” American Economic Review  
110 (3): 677–719. 
Gopinath, Gita, Oleg Itskhoki, and Roberto Rigobon. 2010. “Currency Choice and Exchange Rate 
Pass-through.” American Economic Review 100 (1): 306–36. 
Gopinath, Gita, and Jeremy C. Stein. 2021. “Banking, Trade, and the Making of a Dominant Cur -
rency.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 136 (2): 783–830. 
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier. 2021. “The Dollar Hegemon? Evidence and Implications for Policymak-
ers.” In The Asian Monetary Policy Forum: Insights for Central Banking, edited by Steven J. Davis, 
Edward S. Robinson, and Bernard Yeung, 264–300. Singapore: World Scientific. 
Hassan, Tarek A. 2013. “Country Size, Currency Unions, and International Asset Returns.” Journal of 
Finance 68 (6): 2269–2308. 
Ilzetzki, Ethan, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2019. “Exchange Arrangements Enter-
ing the Twenty-First Century: Which Anchor Will Hold?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 
(2): 599–646.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2021a.  “International Financial Statistics.” https://data.imf.org/
regular.aspx?key=61545850 (accessed December 9, 2021).

===== PAGE 39 =====

688
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW FEBRUARY 2022
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2021b. “World Economic Outlook.” https://www.imf.org/-/
media/Files/Publications/WEO/2021/April/English/text.ashx (accessed December 9, 2021). 
Itskhoki, Oleg, and Dmitry Mukhin. 2021. “Exchange Rate Disconnect in General Equilibrium.” 
 Journal of Political Economy 129 (8): 2183–2232. 
Jiang, Zhengyang, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Hanno Lustig. 2018. “Foreign Safe Asset Demand for 
US Treasurys and the Dollar.” AEA Papers and Proceedings 108: 537–41. 
Kamps, Annette. 2006. “The Euro as Invoicing Currency in International Trade.” European Central 
Bank Working Paper 665. 
Kimball, Miles. 1995. “The Quantitative Analytics of the Basic Neomonetarist Model.” Journal of 
Money, Credit and Banking 27 (4): 1241–77. 
Krugman, Paul. 1980. “Vehicle Currencies and the Structure of International Exchange.” Journal of 
Money, Credit and Banking 12 (3): 513–26. 
Krugman, Paul. 1991. “History versus Expectations.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 (2):  651–67. 
Levy, Daniel, Mark Bergen, Shantanu Dutta, and Robert Venable. 1997. “The Magnitude of Menu 
Costs: Direct Evidence from Large US Supermarket Chains.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 
(3): 791–825. 
Mankiw, N. Gregory. 1985. “Small Menu Costs and Large Business Cycles: A Macroeconomic Model 
of Monopoly.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 100 (2): 529–38. 
Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Ricardo Reis. 2002. “Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices: A Proposal to 
Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (4): 1295–1328. 
Matsuyama, Kiminori. 1991. “Increasing Returns, Industrialization, and Indeterminacy of Equilib-
rium.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 (2): 617–50. 
Matsuyama, Kiminori, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, and Akihiko Matsui. 1993. “Toward a Theory of Interna-
tional Currency.” Review of Economic Studies 60 (2): 283–307. 
Meese, Richard A., and Kenneth Rogoff. 1983. “Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the Seventies: Do 
They Fit Out of Sample?” Journal of International Economics 14 (1): 3–24. 
Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin. 2001. “Global Games: Theory and Applications.” In Advances 
in Economics and Econometrics, V ol. 1, edited by Mathias Dewatripont, Lars Peter Hansen, and 
Stephen J. Turnosky, 56–114. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mukhin, Dmitry. 2022. “Replication Data for: An Equilibrium Model of the International Price Sys-
tem.” American Economic Association [publisher], Inter-university Consortium for Political and 
Social Research [distributor]. https://doi.org/10.3886/E149661V1.
Nakamura, Emi, and Jón Steinsson. 2008. “Five Facts about Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu Cost 
Models.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (4): 1415–64. 
Nakamura, Emi, and Jón Steinsson. 2010. “Monetary Non-neutrality in a Multisector Menu Cost 
Model.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (3): 961–1013. 
Novy, Dennis. 2006. “Hedge Your Costs: Exchange Rate Risk and Endogenous Currency Invoicing.” 
Warwick Economic Research Paper 765. 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2018. “Inter-Country Input-Out-
put (ICIO) Tables.” https://oe.cd/icio (accessed December 9, 2021).
Rey, Hélène. 2001. “International Trade and Currency Exchange.” Review of Economic Studies  
68 (2): 443–64. 
Rotemberg, Julio J. 1982. “Monopolistic Price Adjustment and Aggregate Output.” Review of Eco-
nomic Studies 49 (4): 517–31. 
Sims, Christopher A. 2003. “Implications of Rational Inattention.” Journal Of Monetary Economics 
50 (3): 665–90. 
Taiwan National Statistics. 2021. “Ination.” https://bit.ly/3BNYgAe (accessed December 9, 2021).
World Bank. 2021. “Ination, GDP deator, Argentina,” https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY .GDP.
DEFL.KD.ZG?locations=AR (accessed December 9, 2021).