

===== PAGE 1 =====

A Myersonian Framework for Optimal Liquidity Provision in
Automated Market Makers
Jason Milionis
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
jm@cs.columbia.edu
Ciamac C. Moallemi
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
ciamac@gsb.columbia.edu
Tim Roughgarden
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
a16z Crypto
tim.roughgarden@gmail.com
Initial version: October 19, 2022
Current version: November 27, 2023
Abstract
In decentralized finance (“DeFi”), automated market makers (AMMs) enable traders to
programmatically exchange one asset for another. Such trades are enabled by the assets
deposited by liquidity providers (LPs). The goal of this paper is to characterize and interpret
the optimal (i.e., profit-maximizing) strategy of a monopolist liquidity provider, as a function of
that LP’s beliefs about asset prices and trader behavior. We introduce a general framework for
reasoning about AMMs based on a Bayesian-like belief inference framework, where LPs maintain
an asset price estimate, which is updated by incorporating traders’ price estimates. In this
model, the market maker (i.e., LP) chooses a demand curve that specifies the quantity of a risky
asset to be held at each dollar price. Traders arrive sequentially and submit a price bid that can
be interpreted as their estimate of the risky asset price; the AMM responds to this submitted
bid with an allocation of the risky asset to the trader, a payment that the trader must pay,
and a revised internal estimate for the true asset price. We define an incentive-compatible (IC)
AMM as one in which a trader’s optimal strategy is to submit its true estimate of the asset price,
and characterize the IC AMMs as those with downward-sloping demand curves and payments
defined by a formula familiar from Myerson’s optimal auction theory. We generalize Myerson’s
virtual values, and characterize the profit-maximizing IC AMM. The optimal demand curve
generally has a jump that can be interpreted as a “bid-ask spread,” which we show is caused by
a combination of adverse selection risk (dominant when the degree of information asymmetry is
large) and monopoly pricing (dominant when asymmetry is small). This work opens up new
research directions into the study of automated exchange mechanisms from the lens of optimal
auction theory and iterative belief inference, using tools of theoretical computer science in a
novel way.
arXiv:2303.00208v2  [cs.GT]  27 Nov 2023

===== PAGE 2 =====

1 Introduction
1.1 Exchanges and Market Makers
The purpose of an exchange is to enable the trade of two or more assets. At a stock exchange, for
example, shares of a stock might be exchanged for US dollars via a mechanism known as a “limit
order book” (LOB), in which buyers and sellers post “limit orders” (offers to buy or sell a specified
quantity at a specified price) that are then matched greedily.
Every trade has two sides: for one user to buy a risky asset at a given price, there must be a
corresponding seller willing to sell at that same price. Such trades can occur organically due to
a coincidence of wants from two traders, but in practice many trades are enabled by professional
market makers who continually match buy and sell orders whenever the price is right. This paper is
about the profit-maximization problem faced by such a market maker. In particular, the market
maker is continually updating their beliefs around the asset price, according to a Bayesian-like belief
inference framework, from a prior belief in conjunction with observations by traders who report
price estimates.
Digital assets secured by blockchains, such as cryptocurrencies, are also traded via exchanges.
In centralized exchanges such as Coinbase or Binance, users hand control of their assets over to
the exchange and, therefore, accept the credit risk of not getting them back. Such exchanges are
typically based on the CLOB design. Decentralized exchanges (DEXs), on the other hand, operate
purely programmatically (i.e., “on-chain”), are typically non-custodial (meaning that traders at all
times have direct control of their assets in the sense that assets are not entrusted to a third party),
and often depart from the CLOB model. There are several reasons for this departure: on-chain
computation and storage can be expensive, and CLOBs need a lot of both; the markets for many
digital assets (especially long-tail ones) are thin and have no dedicated market makers, in which case
CLOBs may fail to provide an acceptable level of liquidity; and a general openness in the blockchain
world to experimental designs. The DEX design space is large, and many different designs have been
deployed (on Ethereum and other general-purpose smart contract platforms) over the past years.
For example, Uniswap (especially in its earliest iterations, v1 and v2) is a canonical example
of an automated market maker (AMM) . In an AMM (unlike in a CLOB), the roles of traders and
market makers are clearly separated. A market maker, which in this context is called a liquidity
provider (LP), deposits into the AMM some amounts of the assets being traded (and is, by default,
passive thereafter). At all times, the AMM defines a marginal price as a function of its current
reserves of those assets. (In the case of Uniswap v1 and v2, the spot price of an AMM is simply the
ratio of the quantities of its two assets.) The AMM is willing to take either side of a trade (buy or
sell) at its current marginal price, and in this sense is always providing liquidity to traders. The
latest iteration of Uniswap (v3) blurs the line between AMMs and CLOBs by allowing a much wider
range of LP demand curves than in v2 (to some extent approximating what can be expressed by
limit orders in a CLOB), thereby encouraging an LP to more actively manage its demand curve as
market conditions evolve.
The goal of this paper is to characterize the solution to the following fundamental question:
What is the optimal liquidity demand curve for a profit-maximizing market maker? This question is
relevant for a market maker in a CLOB, an LP of an expressive AMM such as Uniswap v3, or even
the designer of a new AMM (in which case the market making liquidity demand curve is defined
programmatically rather than submitted by a third-party LP). This paper offers a new model for
reasoning about this question and a quite general answer, which resembles in many respects, and in
2

===== PAGE 3 =====

fact generalizes, Myerson’s theory of optimal auctions (Myerson 1981). To get a feel for our model
and results, we next discuss a highly restricted but nonetheless illuminating special case, and give a
very brief overview of our general theory.
1.2 The Pure “Noise Trading” Case and an Overview of the General Case
The theory of market microstructure (see e.g., O’Hara (2011)) differentiates between “informed
traders,” who have better information about the fundamental value of an asset than the market
maker does, and “noise traders,” who trade for idiosyncratic reasons that do not reflect any private
information about the fundamental value of the asset. Generally speaking, market makers lose
money to informed traders due to adverse selection: by virtue of such a trader being willing to
trade, it expects a profit, which, due to the zero-sum nature of common-value assets, comes at the
expense of the market maker. Market makers can, however, generally profit from noise traders. In
this section, we first consider (as an instructive warm-up) the special case in which all traders are
noise traders (and hence adverse selection plays no role). Our general model, the results of which
are briefly presented in the end of this section, and which is detailed in Section 3 accommodates
arbitrary mixtures of informed and noise traders, and our general results must therefore reflect
adverse selection effects in addition to the aspects identified in this section.
Fundamentally, a market maker must decide, as a function of the information available to it,
how much of a risky asset they are willing to buy or sell at different prices. For this example, we
will assume that the market maker knows the true value 𝑝0 of the risky asset that it is trading.
An obvious strategy for such a market maker is to accept exactly the orders on which it makes
money: all (and only) the buy orders with offered price more than 𝑝0, and all (and only) the
sell orders with offered price less than 𝑝0. However, as we will see, this is not in general the
profit-maximizing strategy for a market maker.
It will be convenient to encode a market maker’s strategy via the choice of a demand curve 𝑔,
which maps prices to quantities (i.e., an amount of risky asset that will be held by the market
maker). The interpretation is that the market maker would be interested in selling 𝑔(𝑝0)−𝑔(𝑝)
units of the risky asset at the price 𝑝. (Note that this may be a negative number of units, in which
case the market maker will be buying the risky asset from the trader.) A choice of 𝑝0 and 𝑔 induces
the allocation rule 𝑥(𝑝) = 𝑔(𝑝0)−𝑔(𝑝), the amount of the risky asset allocated to a trader who
reports a price of 𝑝.
Next, we assume that a trader reports a price ^𝑝∼𝒟 that is drawn according to a distribution 𝒟
known to the market maker. We assume that the trader is willing to buy or sell at most a bounded
amount of the risky asset (normalized to be 1 only for notational convenience, since there is no
difference whatsoever for any arbitrary finite bound on the results), and that the demand curve 𝑔
and price 𝑝0 accordingly satisfy 𝑔(𝑝0)−𝑔(^𝑝)∈ [−1, 1] for all ^𝑝. When the noise trader reports
their price ^𝑝, they receive an allocation 𝑥(^𝑝) = 𝑔(𝑝0)−𝑔(^𝑝) of the risky asset and must remit a
payment𝑦(^𝑝) to the AMM for this provision. As we will see in Section 2, the natural notion of
incentive-compatibility in this setting — that a utility-maximizing trader who values the risky asset
at a price ^𝑝 will in fact report ^𝑝 to the AMM — uniquely pins down the payments (the 𝑦(^𝑝)’s) as a
function of the allocation rule (the 𝑥(^𝑝)’s).1
1As the reader might guess, it is also essential that the allocation rule 𝑥 is monotone in ^𝑝, or equivalently that the
demand curve 𝑔 is downward-sloping, with the market maker selling more and more of the risky asset as the going
price gets higher and higher. See Section 2 for details.
3

===== PAGE 4 =====

With informed traders, a rational market maker will update its estimate 𝑝0 of the risky asset’s
true price following a trade (generally increasing it after a trader buys the risky asset from the
market maker and decreasing it after a sell). Our general model in Section 3 accommodates this
through a generic update rule 𝜋(𝑝0, ^𝑝) that specifies the market maker’s new estimate as a function
of its old estimate 𝑝0 and the new information conveyed by a trader reporting the price ^𝑝. For
example, 𝜋 might correspond to a Bayesian update with respect to some assumed information
structure, and the update rule may come from and be revised according to a no-regret learning
algorithm used by the market maker on successive rounds. In the simple special case of only noise
traders being present, because the behavior of noise traders is (by assumption) independent of the
true value of the risky asset, the market maker has no cause for updating its internal price (i.e.,
𝜋(𝑝0, ^𝑝) =𝑝0 for all 𝑝0 and ^𝑝).
What is the optimal strategy (i.e., choice of demand curve 𝑔) for the market maker? That is,
which choice of 𝑔 maximizes
E[Profit] = E[𝑦(^𝑝)−𝑝0·𝑥(^𝑝)], (1)
where the expectation is with respect to ^𝑝∼𝒟 , 𝑥(^𝑝) =𝑔(𝑝0)−𝑔(^𝑝) is the allocation rule, and 𝑦 is
the uniquely defined payment rule mentioned above? 2 (In the general case, the “ 𝑝0” term in (1)
is replaced by 𝜋(𝑝0, ^𝑝), with the market maker evaluating its portfolio according to its new belief
about the value of the risky asset, conditioned on observing the trader’s report of ^𝑝.)
The results in this paper imply that the answer to this question is always defined by a posted-
price-like mechanism with two prices (depending on 𝒟), 𝑝𝑙≤ 𝑝0 and 𝑝ℎ≥ 𝑝0. These two prices
split the price range into three intervals, and the optimal strategy is to always buy the maximum
amount in the lowest price interval, always sell in the highest price interval, and refuse to trade in
the middle price interval.
We will be interested in the length of this middle price interval, which we call the no-trade
gap. Bigger no-trade gaps are generally worse from a welfare perspective, with welfare-increasing
trades sacrificed in the name of higher profit to the market maker. The no-trade gap is reminiscent
of the “bid-ask spread” in CLOBs, which occupies a central position in the study of traditional
market-making in CLOBs. 3 Traditionally, theoretical justifications for non-trivial bid-ask spreads in
CLOBs have relied on frictions (like transaction fees or inventory costs) or adverse selection (with a
market maker needing to exploit noise traders to cover the losses to informed traders). In the current
example, with neither frictions nor adverse selection, the no-trade gap arises for a different reason,
namely the monopolist position of the market-maker. In our general model, with the possibility of
informed traders, monopoly pricing and adverse selection both contribute to the no-trade gap. For
example, no matter what the distribution 𝒟 is, if all traders have perfect information (i.e., extreme
adverse selection), then the no-trade gap encompasses the full price range.
The prices 𝑝𝑙 and 𝑝ℎ that split the price range into three intervals, and hence the no-trade
gap, are distribution-dependent. For example, intuitively, one might expect a smaller gap for
distributions𝒟 that are tightly concentrated around 𝑝0. In general, our analysis shows that these
two prices can be characterized as roots of two functions that resemble the virtual valuation functions
2Note that, obviously, the choice of the optimal mechanism does not need the knowledge of the reported price by
the trader; only its probabilistic characteristics are known according to the distribution 𝒟.
3In a CLOB, the “bid” and “ask” refer to the highest price of an outstanding buy order and the lowest price of an
outstanding sell order, respectively. Because limit orders in a CLOB are always matched greedily, the bid-ask spread
is always non-negative. Small spreads are generally viewed as a good thing, indicating a “highly liquid” market (with
lower trading costs, at least for small quantities).
4

===== PAGE 5 =====

used in optimal auction theory (Myerson 1981).
We next give two example cases for pure noise-trading: if 𝒟 is the uniform distribution on
[𝑝min,𝑝 max], then 𝑝𝑙 = (𝑝min +𝑝0)/2 and 𝑝ℎ = (𝑝0 +𝑝max)/2; the resulting optimal allocation
rule is depicted in Figure 1a. If 𝒟 is the exponential distribution with parameter 𝜆 (on [0,∞)),
then 𝑝ℎ =𝑝0 + 1
𝜆. The lower price 𝑝𝑙 does not have a closed-form expression in this case, but can be
easily approximated numerically (given 𝑝0 and 𝜆); Figure 2 enumerates some examples of how these
lower prices vary, and an illustration of the optimal allocation rule is contained in Figure 1b.
𝑝0 𝑝max+𝑝0
2
𝑝max
-1
0
1
𝑝min
𝑝min+𝑝0
2
𝑥𝑎(^𝑝)
^𝑝
𝑝0 𝑝0 + 1
𝜆
-1
0
1
𝑝𝑙
𝑥𝑏(^𝑝)
^𝑝
Figure 1: Optimal allocation rule 𝑥(^𝑝) in “pure noise trading” showing the no-trade gap around 𝑝0
when the distribution ^𝑝∼𝒟 is: (a) the uniform distribution on [ 𝑝min,𝑝 max], (b) the exponential
distribution on [0,∞) with parameter 𝜆 = 2 for 𝑝0 = 1 (the computation of 𝑝𝑙 can only be done via
numerical methods; see Figure 2).
𝑝0∖ 𝜆 0.5 1 2
0.25 0.123 0.121 0.118
0.5 0.242 0.235 0.221
0.75 0.358 0.342 0.314
1 0.470 0.443 0.396
1.5 0.684 0.627 0.537
2 0.886 0.792 0.653
Figure 2: Table of lower prices 𝑝𝑙 in “pure noise trading” when the distribution ^𝑝∼𝒟 is the
exponential distribution on [0,∞) with parameter 𝜆.
The rest of this paper develops a similarly precise understanding of optimal market-maker
strategies in a more general setting. We will now briefly present here the general results in an
informal way. For the details, the reader is referred to Section 3.
Informal Theorem 1. There exist virtual valuation functions 𝜑𝑢(𝑠) and 𝜑𝑙(𝑠), such that the
expected profit, shown in Eq. (1) in the general case where the “ 𝑝0” term is replaced by 𝜋(𝑝0, ^𝑝), is
equal to the expected virtual welfare of an auction with virtual values derived by 𝜑𝑢(𝑠) if 𝑠≥𝑝0 and
𝜑𝑙(𝑠) if 𝑠<𝑝 0.
Informal Theorem 2. There exist two prices 𝑝𝑙≤𝑝0 and 𝑝ℎ≥𝑝0, such that the optimal allocation
rule of a market maker that maximizes their expected profit is to buy the maximum amount if the
trader reports a price ^𝑝≤𝑝𝑙 and sell the maximum amount if the trader reports a price ^𝑝≥𝑝ℎ, and
refuse to trade in the interval between these two prices, i.e., when ^𝑝∈ (𝑝𝑙,𝑝ℎ).
5

===== PAGE 6 =====

The formal statements of the above results are Theorem 3.1 and Theorem 3.2 respectively.
Finally, in Section 4, we examine how our general theory above applies in the interesting special
case of a linear update rule. Through this special case, we naturally show that the structure of
the no-trade gap captures precisely the complex effect that is the interpolation between the effects
of adverse selection (observed when all traders have perfect information) and monopoly pricing
(observed when all traders are noise traders). For further details, we refer the interested reader to
Section 4.
1.3 Related Work
Auctions. This paper critically relates to revenue maximizing auction design, initiated under the
pioneering work of Myerson (1981). Since then, various versions of virtual values have been used in a
variety of settings among others for specifying optimal auctions and their approximations, including
as to how they relate to no-regret learning in auctions (e.g., Bulow and Roberts (1989), Chawla et al.
(2007), Hartline (2012), Haghpanah and Hartline (2015), Chawla et al. (2019), Chawla et al. (2010),
Alaei et al. (2013), Roughgarden and Talgam-Cohen (2019), Roughgarden and Talgam-Cohen (2016),
and Hartline and Roughgarden (2009)); in a similar spirit, we define and use functions that can
be interpreted as virtual valuations. For a survey of results around revenue-optimal mechanisms,
virtual values, optimal auctions, and their approximations, see the book by Hartline (2021).
AMMs. Constant function market makers (CFMMs) have arisen from the idea of holding some
function constant across “trading states” (from states of the world, previously, on the utility-based
framework of AMMs for prediction markets by Chen and Pennock (2007)), and are characterized by
such an invariant called a bonding function. This means that the AMM is willing to take the other
side of any trade that corresponds to remaining on a constant level curve of the particular bonding
function chosen. Tools from convex analysis —familiar to both the algorithmic game theory and
machine learning theory communities— are crucially used to analyze CFMMs and prove “optimal
behavior” properties for participating traders (Milionis et al. 2022; Milionis et al. 2023b; Angeris
and Chitra 2020; Angeris et al. 2021a; Angeris et al. 2021b).
The description of the framework that we use for AMMs — inspired by a reparameterization of
a CFMM curve (established by Angeris and Chitra (2020)) in terms of portfolio holdings of the
pool with respect to the price — resembles that in Milionis et al. (2023a), who used a similar AMM
framework for a different purpose, namely unifying constant function market makers (CFMMs) and
limit order books (LOBs) and complexity-approximation trade-offs between them. The latter work
considers neither incentive-compatibility constraints nor the problem of optimal liquidity provision.
Asset price beliefs in AMMs. Goyal et al. (2022) also examine beliefs of LPs (specifically on
CFMMs) around future asset prices; however, in their model, these beliefs are static (i.e., similar to a
single prior that remains unchanged throughout the trades’ occurrence) or modeled by a fixed price
dynamic discounted to the present (i.e., still not dynamically revised in response to incoming trades).
The focus of Goyal et al. (2022) is the design of CFMMs that maximize the fraction of trades that
the CFMM can satisfy with small slippage under the stationary distribution of the Markov chain
induced by their model. Our work focuses instead on LP profit-maximization with informed traders
and noise traders, showing a formal relation between the optimal auction design literature, including
computational considerations in approximations of those, and the market microstructure literature.
6

===== PAGE 7 =====

There is also work specific to Uniswap v3 from the LP perspective around how beliefs about
future prices should guide the choice of an LP’s demand curve (Fan et al. 2022; Yin and Ren 2021;
Neuder et al. 2021).
Market microstructure. There is a large literature on the market microstructure of limit order
books; see the textbook by O’Hara (2011) and references therein. Closest to the present work is the
paper of Glosten (1989). Focusing on the role of asymmetric information, Glosten (1989) considers
the problem of a monopolist optimizing their liquidity demand curve, but in the presence of risk
averse traders (in contrast to our setting, where the traders can be viewed as risk neutral). The
risk averse setting is more technically challenging, and hence Glosten (1989) is required to make
very strong and highly specific technical assumptions (normally distributed values and observation
noise) that are not necessary, obscure the general intuition in our setting, and do not add value.
Instead, the intuition provided by our model is much stronger and more general. Moreover, our
risk neutrality assumption unlocks a fruitful connection between optimal market-making and the
Myersonian theory of optimal auction design. Glosten (1994) considers the related problem of the
liquidity demand curve in a competitive equilibrium. The latter paper is restricted to a limit order
book, and does not consider more general forms of liquidity provision in exchange mechanisms, like
the ones we do. Glosten and Milgrom (1985) operate in a competitive regime with zero expected
profits, which gives a completely different reason for bid-ask spreads to arise than the one given
in our work. Kyle (1985) develops a model where a single informed trader (“insider”) competes
with noise traders and market makers, showing the incorporation of insider information into the
equilibrium price. In this work, the focus is on the informed trader who is a monopolist (there
is only one), whereas in our work informed traders are unrestricted and the market maker is a
monopolist in their liquidity provision. Kyle (1989) continues to examine the informational efficiency
of equilibrium prices in a slightly more general setting, where there is competition among informed
traders, showing that prices are less informative than in the competitive equilibrium. Both of
these papers use strong assumptions, predominantly the normal distribution over both the values
and the order sizes. While their models are related to ours in their considerations of types of
participants present and observations in the optimal case, the present results were not known in
either of these two works; neither of these models is as general as ours, neither relates whatsoever
to mechanism design and incentive compatibility constraints, and both are based on very strong
technical assumptions that our work does not need.
Sequential market-making. Finally, the framework we describe is similar to sequential market-
making procedures in its use of iterative belief updating. Such procedures have been studied in the
past including in the context of online learning frameworks (Abernethy and Kale 2013; Brahma
et al. 2012; Das and Magdon-Ismail 2008; Das 2005). Closer to our Bayesian setting, Das and
Magdon-Ismail (2008) consider the liquidity present across trade sizes in a multi-period monopolistic
market making model (and subsequently shows the superiority of this compared to a competitive
multi-dealer market). The above works, however, do not show a connection between optimal
market-making and the Myersonian theory of optimal auction design, which is the key focus in our
results.
7

===== PAGE 8 =====

2 Automated market makers
We begin by presenting a general framework of exchange for automated market makers (AMMs) that
allows us to consider market making as conducting an auction, and is based on market participants
(traders) trading with the AMM on the basis of future price beliefs.
More specifically, suppose there are two assets, a risky asset and a num´ eraire asset. An AMM
according to this framework is defined by a demand curve 𝑔 : (0,∞)→ R+ such that the function
𝑔(·) represents the current demand of the market maker for the risky asset as a function of price, i.e.,
the amount of risky asset that the market maker wishes to hold at each possible price, along with a
payment rule 𝑦 : (0,∞)→ R such that the function 𝑦(·) specifies the quantity of num´ eraire that a
trader needs to pay depending on the current AMM price 𝑝0 (which instantiates a specific state of
this AMM’s demand curve, i.e., a current demand of the AMM for 𝑔(𝑝0) of risky asset) and what
they declare to the AMM that their price estimate is (see the following paragraph on trading for the
precise definition). The market maker is assumed to have no inventory costs or budget constraints.
The demand curve𝑔 along with an appropriately defined payment rule can arise through bonding
curves of traditional constant function market makers (CFMMs, i.e., functions 𝑓 such that the
holdings of the joint pool (𝑥,𝑦 ) satisfy𝑓(𝑥,𝑦 ) =𝑐 for some𝑐) but this is not necessary: the exchange
mechanisms defined by this framework strictly generalize CFMMs (see also Milionis et al. (2023a)).
Additionally, a non-continuous demand curve 𝑔 can also be used to express limit orders, with the
discontinuities representing limit buy or limit sell orders at the corresponding price, of quantity of
risky asset equal to the jump at that price (Milionis et al. 2023a).
Trading A trader who wants to trade with the AMM has some (hidden) belief about the asset
price. The trader will come to the mechanism and specify a price bid ^𝑝. Based on their bid, the
trader will get a quantity 𝑔(𝑝0)−𝑔(^𝑝) of risky asset. Finally, the AMM revises its current price
(which was previously 𝑝0) according to some update rule (we will see more about the update rule
from Section 3 onwards; it will play no role in this section). We say that the trader was allocated a
quantity𝑥(^𝑝) ≜𝑔(𝑝0)−𝑔(^𝑝) of asset. This interpretation makes it natural to consider the transaction
with the trader as an auction with one bidder; the trader has a price estimate (valuation) for the
risky asset, will be allocated a portion of the risky asset (provided by the market maker) based on
their submitted price bid, and will need to pay the market maker an amount 𝑦(^𝑝) of num´ eraire for
it. Notice that it may be the case that 𝑥(^𝑝)< 0, which means that the trader will sell risky asset to
the AMM, and the market maker will now need to come up with the corresponding payment to the
trader for it.
Example: Uniswap v2 Let’s consider the simple case of a constant product market maker
(CPMM), such as Uniswap v2, to show how it emerges from the framework above. Consider the
demand curve of the AMM to be of the form 𝑔(𝑝) = 𝑐√𝑝, for some 𝑐> 0, and the payment rule to be
of the form 𝑦(^𝑝) =𝑐
(︀√^𝑝−√𝑝0
)︀
, for the same 𝑐> 0. A trader who will trade with this exchange
at a current price 𝑝0 with a price bid ^𝑝 will obtain a quantity 𝑥(^𝑝) =𝑔(𝑝0)−𝑔(^𝑝) =𝑐
(︁
1√𝑝0
− 1√^𝑝
)︁
of risky asset. Since the curve 𝑔(𝑝) above is just a reparameterization (in terms of prices) of the
risky asset holdings of the CPMM curve 4 𝑥𝑦 =𝑘 where 𝑘 =𝑐2 (Angeris et al. 2021b), by comparing
4Note that here 𝑥 and 𝑦 — without the parentheses — are not the functions above, but rather the current total
reserves of the AMM pool.
8

===== PAGE 9 =====

the expression of the quantity of risky asset that the trader gets, we conclude that they get the
same quantity as in the CPMM.
2.1 Incentive-compatible AMMs
We will now consider that traders interacting with AMMs have utility functions that emerge naturally
from their true belief about the asset price versus what they bid to obtain a quantity of risky asset
from the AMM. In particular, a trader who has a true belief of 𝑝 for the asset’s price, and submits
a bid ^𝑝 to the AMM seeks to optimize (maximize) their utility defined by
𝑢(𝑝, ^𝑝) ≜𝑝·𝑥(^𝑝)−𝑦(^𝑝), (2)
because they consider that the asset’s true value to them is 𝑝 per unit, they obtain a quantity 𝑥(^𝑝)
of it, and pay 𝑦(^𝑝) for this trade.
Definition 1. [Incentive-compatible AMM] An AMM defined according to a demand curve 𝑔(𝑝)
and a payment rule𝑦(^𝑝) is called incentive compatible (IC), if any trader whose utility follows Eq. (2)
has as an optimal strategy for interacting with the AMM to submit their true belief about the asset
price as their bid to the AMM.
Is an AMM defined by an arbitrary demand curve 𝑔(𝑝) and an arbitrary payment rule 𝑦(^𝑝)
incentive compatible? The answer is no, and the characterization of IC AMMs follows standard
results of dominant-strategy incentive-compatible (DSIC) single-parameter auctions.
Proposition 2.1 (Characterization of IC AMMs) . An AMM defined according to a demand
curve 𝑔(𝑝) can be paired with a payment rule 𝑦(^𝑝) to obtain an IC AMM, if and only if 𝑔(𝑝) is a
non-increasing function.
Proof. First, we observe the analogy drawn to allocations of asset for trades: 𝑥(^𝑝) =𝑔(𝑝0)−𝑔(^𝑝).
Since the utility function for the auction with a single bidder (the trader) is of the form of Eq. (2),
the proposition follows from the characterization of dominant-strategy incentive-compatible (DSIC)
single-parameter auctions’ allocation rules 𝑥(^𝑝) as only those functions which are monotone, and
specifically non-decreasing functions, because 𝑥(^𝑝) is non-decreasing precisely if and only if 𝑔(^𝑝) is
non-increasing.
More specifically, we follow the standard analysis to showcase the exact correspondence of the
settings but do not show the entire analysis, as this follows Myerson’s. In order for the optimal
strategy of any trader with true belief 𝑝 to be to submit 𝑝 to the AMM, we need to have that for
any𝑝, ^𝑝:
𝑢(𝑝,𝑝 )≥𝑢(𝑝, ^𝑝)⇔𝑝·𝑥(𝑝)−𝑦(𝑝)≥𝑝·𝑥(^𝑝)−𝑦(^𝑝)⇔𝑝· [𝑥(𝑝)−𝑥(^𝑝)]≥𝑦(𝑝)−𝑦(^𝑝).
Additionally, if the converse holds, and the true belief of the trader was ^𝑝 while it is considering
submitting 𝑝 to the AMM, then we also need to have that for any 𝑝, ^𝑝:
𝑢(^𝑝, ^𝑝)≥𝑢(^𝑝,𝑝 )⇔ ^𝑝·𝑥(^𝑝)−𝑦(^𝑝)≥ ^𝑝·𝑥(𝑝)−𝑦(𝑝)⇔ ^𝑝· [𝑥(𝑝)−𝑥(^𝑝)]≤𝑦(𝑝)−𝑦(^𝑝).
Combining these two inequalities, we get that for any 𝑝, ^𝑝:
^𝑝· [𝑥(𝑝)−𝑥(^𝑝)]≤𝑦(𝑝)−𝑦(^𝑝)≤𝑝· [𝑥(𝑝)−𝑥(^𝑝)] ,
hence it is immediate (from the derived inequality ( 𝑝− ^𝑝)· [𝑥(𝑝)−𝑥(^𝑝)]≥ 0) that 𝑥(^𝑝) needs to be
non-decreasing.
9

===== PAGE 10 =====

The next question to be answered is whether arbitrary payment rules 𝑦(^𝑝) are allowed to be
requested by an IC AMM. Not surprisingly, as is the case for payments defined by an allocation
rule of a DSIC mechanism, the payments need to be precisely defined by the demand curve for an
IC AMM. The below formula is familiar from Myerson’s single-parameter DSIC auction design.
Corollary 2.2 (Payments of traders on IC AMMs) . Suppose that any trader who is allocated a
quantity 0 of risky asset pays 0 amount of num´ eraire to an IC AMM according to Definition 1 with
a demand curve 𝑔(𝑝). The IC AMM’s payment rule 𝑦(^𝑝) for a trader submitting a price bid ^𝑝 needs
to be exactly:
𝑦(^𝑝) =
∫︁ ^𝑝
𝑝0
𝑠 𝑑𝑥(𝑠) =−
∫︁ ^𝑝
𝑝0
𝑝 𝑑𝑔(𝑝). (3)
The above integrals are Riemann–Stieltjes integrals. In cases where 𝑔(𝑝) is differentiable, the
differential takes the form 𝑑𝑔(𝑝) =𝑔′(𝑝) 𝑑𝑝.
Proof. From Myerson’s single-parameter auction design, we know that there is a unique payment
rule (up to an additive constant) for DSIC single-parameter auctions; that is, 𝑦(^𝑝) =
∫︀ ^𝑝
𝑝0𝑠 𝑑𝑥(𝑠),
where the arbitrary additive constant is no longer present, as we have integrated the required
normalization that for an allocation of 𝑥(𝑝0) =𝑔(𝑝0)−𝑔(𝑝0) = 0 asset, the payment needs to be
𝑦(𝑝0) = 0. This directly translates to the formula given in the corollary’s statement in terms of the
demand curve 𝑔(𝑝) of the AMM.
Note that the integral that defines the payments is non-negative if ^𝑝≥𝑝0, and non-positive if
^𝑝≤𝑝0. This is compatible with the direction of the trade, as defined by the allocation rule and
Proposition 2.1, which is that 𝑥(^𝑝)≥ 0 for ^𝑝≥𝑝0, and 𝑥(^𝑝)≤ 0 for ^𝑝≤𝑝0.
3 Optimal liquidity provision via revenue maximization
3.1 Bayesian model for optimal allocation rule
First, we describe our model for how the market maker should optimize their allocation rule for the
asset. From now on, the market maker will be assumed to be risk-neutral, i.e., be indifferent to
“risk,” and only care to be profit-maximizing.
The Bayesian belief framework operates as follows: the market maker has a prior belief dis-
tribution on the asset price, and the (single) price it decides to use is 𝑝0; for example, and most
commonly,𝑝0 will be the mean of this prior distribution. A trader then comes to the AMM with an
estimate ^𝑝 (that is the true belief of the trader, if the AMM is IC according to Definition 1). Traders
are on the market to buy or sell up to 1 unit of the asset; 5 that is, the allocation rule should satisfy
−1≤𝑥(^𝑝)≤ 1 for all ^𝑝. The trader’s estimate ^𝑝 is perceived by the market maker as one observation
of an asset price estimate coming from a distribution 𝒟 that is included in the market maker’s
model. For this distribution 𝒟, we assume that it has a continuous, positive density function 𝑓(^𝑝)
on a compact support [𝑝min,𝑝 max] and a cumulative density function (CDF) 𝐹 (^𝑝) =
∫︀ ^𝑝
𝑝min𝑓(𝑠) 𝑑𝑠.6
5This is just for notational convenience. In fact, it generalizes easily for demand up to any arbitrary finite bound,
and a subsequent normalization enables using exactly our results here with unit demand.
6Our results can be extended to non-continuous density functions supported at possibly non-compact intervals,
e.g., (0, ∞), but for simplicity of exposition, we do not focus on handling these edge cases here, since they do not add
to the general discussion points of the paper.
10

===== PAGE 11 =====

Applying Bayes’ theorem allows the market maker to specify the posterior distribution of the
asset price, conditional on the observation from the trader. The market maker then sets this
posterior distribution as their new prior for future observations (trades). We will assume that the
way this posterior is used by the AMM is through valuing the quantity of asset given or obtained at
a price of 𝜋(𝑝0, ^𝑝) which can be, for instance, the mean of the posterior distribution according to the
Bayesian framework. (A very interesting special case as to how a linear dependence arises on the
mean of the posterior with normally distributed prior and observational error is shown in Section 4.)
In general, we will call 𝜋(𝑝0, ^𝑝) the “update rule” and — for generality — we will not impose
further constraints arising from the Bayesian framework on what it may be other than that:
Assumption 1. The following conditions have to hold for the update rule:
• 𝜋(𝑝0, ^𝑝) lies in the interval between 𝑝0 and ^𝑝.
• 𝜋(𝑝0, ^𝑝) is non-decreasing in ^𝑝.
• 𝜋(𝑝0,𝑝 0) =𝑝0, i.e., if the trader’s estimate is the same as the market maker’s prior, then the
updated valuation of the market maker for the asset should be the same as their prior.
• E^𝑝∼𝒟[𝜋(𝑝0, ^𝑝)] =𝑝0, i.e., the prior is consistent with the update rule.
Therefore, according to the above, the market maker’s next best estimate for the asset’s price is
𝜋(𝑝0, ^𝑝) conditioned on receiving the trader’s estimate ^𝑝. It is then natural to consider that, when
selling (respectively, buying) some quantity 𝑥(^𝑝) of the asset from the trader, the AMM will not
only consider the amount of money that they receive (respectively, give) but also their perceived
best estimate of the value of the asset that they lost (respectively, gained). This, then, arises as
an interesting contrast to traditional auction theory, where the revenue of the auction is only the
payment that is made. Here, according to the above reasoning, it makes sense for the AMM to
value their profit according to
Profit =𝑦(^𝑝)−𝜋(𝑝0, ^𝑝)·𝑥(^𝑝). (4)
Therefore, an AMM choosing an optimal strategy to provide liquidity will consider the strategy
that maximizes their profit, among all feasible, incentive-compatible (for the traders) strategies.
3.2 Equivalence of expected profit and virtual welfare, and virtual value functions
By re-working Myerson’s optimal auction theory under the new objective that we want to optimize
and the constraints that come with the definition of the allocation rule from an AMM, we get that:
Theorem 3.1. [Expected Profit = Expected Virtual Welfare] The expected profit according to Eq. (4)
of a market maker under the assumptions of Section 3.1 is equal to the expected virtual welfare, i.e.,
E
^𝑝∼𝒟
[Profit] = E
^𝑝∼𝒟
[|𝑥(^𝑝)|· (𝜑𝑢(^𝑝)· 1^𝑝≥𝑝0 +𝜑𝑙(^𝑝)· 1^𝑝≤𝑝0)]
where 1𝐴 is the indicator function that is 1 when 𝐴 holds and 0 otherwise, and 𝜑𝑢(𝑠),𝜑𝑙(𝑠) are the
virtual value functions defined by
𝜑𝑢(𝑠) ≜𝑠− 1−𝐹 (𝑠)
𝑓(𝑠) −𝜋(𝑝0,𝑠 ) (5)
11

===== PAGE 12 =====

and
𝜑𝑙(𝑠) ≜𝜋(𝑝0,𝑠 )−𝑠− 𝐹 (𝑠)
𝑓(𝑠) . (6)
Proof. By Eq. (3) and re-writing 𝑥(^𝑝) using the normalization condition, we have that 7
𝑦(^𝑝) =
∫︁ ^𝑝
𝑝0
𝑠𝑥′(𝑠) 𝑑𝑠 and 𝑥(^𝑝) =
∫︁ ^𝑝
𝑝0
𝑥′(𝑠) 𝑑𝑠,
so that the expected profit E^𝑝∼𝒟[Profit] is
∫︁ 𝑝max
𝑝min
∫︁ ^𝑝
𝑝0
(𝑠−𝜋(𝑝0, ^𝑝))𝑥′(𝑠)𝑓(^𝑝) 𝑑𝑠 𝑑^𝑝
=
∫︁ 𝑝max
𝑝0
∫︁ ^𝑝
𝑝0
(𝑠−𝜋(𝑝0, ^𝑝))𝑥′(𝑠)𝑓(^𝑝) 𝑑𝑠 𝑑^𝑝−
∫︁ 𝑝0
𝑝min
∫︁ 𝑝0
^𝑝
(𝑠−𝜋(𝑝0, ^𝑝))𝑥′(𝑠)𝑓(^𝑝) 𝑑𝑠 𝑑^𝑝
=
∫︁ 𝑝max
𝑝0
∫︁ 𝑝max
𝑠
(𝑠−𝜋(𝑝0, ^𝑝))𝑥′(𝑠)𝑓(^𝑝) 𝑑^𝑝 𝑑𝑠−
∫︁ 𝑝0
𝑝min
∫︁ 𝑠
𝑝min
(𝑠−𝜋(𝑝0, ^𝑝))𝑥′(𝑠)𝑓(^𝑝) 𝑑^𝑝 𝑑𝑠
=
∫︁ 𝑝max
𝑝0
𝑥′(𝑠)
(︂
𝑠(1−𝐹 (𝑠))−
∫︁ 𝑝max
𝑠
𝜋(𝑝0, ^𝑝)𝑓(^𝑝) 𝑑^𝑝
)︂
𝑑𝑠
−
∫︁ 𝑝0
𝑝min
𝑥′(𝑠)
(︂
𝑠𝐹 (𝑠)−
∫︁ 𝑠
𝑝min
𝜋(𝑝0, ^𝑝)𝑓(^𝑝) 𝑑^𝑝
)︂
𝑑𝑠
=−
∫︁ 𝑝max
𝑝0
𝑥(𝑠) (1−𝐹 (𝑠) + (𝜋(𝑝0,𝑠 )−𝑠)𝑓(𝑠)) 𝑑𝑠 +
∫︁ 𝑝0
𝑝min
𝑥(𝑠) (𝐹 (𝑠) + (𝑠−𝜋(𝑝0,𝑠 ))𝑓(𝑠)) 𝑑𝑠
=
∫︁ 𝑝max
𝑝0
|𝑥(𝑠)|
(︂
𝑠−𝜋(𝑝0,𝑠 )− 1−𝐹 (𝑠)
𝑓(𝑠)
)︂
𝑓(𝑠) 𝑑𝑠 +
∫︁ 𝑝0
𝑝min
|𝑥(𝑠)|
(︂
𝜋(𝑝0,𝑠 )−𝑠− 𝐹 (𝑠)
𝑓(𝑠)
)︂
𝑓(𝑠) 𝑑𝑠,
where the third line arises from switching the order of the integrals (and the correct switching
depends on the relative order of 𝑝0 and ^𝑝 which is why the second line is needed; the first integral
when ^𝑝≥𝑝0 and the second vice-versa), the fifth line from integration by parts, and the sixth line
because 𝑥(𝑠)≤ 0 for 𝑠≤𝑝0 and 𝑥(𝑠)≥ 0 for 𝑠≥𝑝0.
Therefore, the two virtual value functions are as in the theorem description.
3.3 Derivation of the optimal allocation rule and the no-trade gap
We now turn our attention to optimizing the expected profit, i.e., finding the allocation rule
(equivalently, the demand curve up to an arbitrary positive additive constant) which maximizes the
expected profit.
Theorem 3.2. The optimal allocation rule 𝑥⋆(^𝑝) that maximizes the expected profit according to
Eq. (4) under the assumptions of Section 3.1 has the form
𝑥⋆(^𝑝) =
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
1, for 𝑝1≤ ^𝑝≤𝑝max
0, for 𝑝2< ^𝑝<𝑝 1
−1, for 𝑝min≤ ^𝑝≤𝑝2
,
where𝑝1≥𝑝0 and 𝑝2≤𝑝0 are some roots of the upper and lower virtual value functions 𝜑𝑢(𝑠),𝜑𝑙(𝑠)
of Eqs. (5) and (6) respectively.
7This proof assumes differentiability of 𝑥(𝑠) for simplicity of the technical exposition but carries through verbatim
in terms of Riemann–Stieltjes integrals where 𝑥′(𝑠) 𝑑𝑠 = 𝑑𝑥(𝑠), which always exist because 𝑥(𝑠) is guaranteed to be
monotonic by Proposition 2.1.
12

===== PAGE 13 =====

Proof. We will use the equivalence of expected profit and expected virtual welfare established by
Theorem 3.1. Because we operate under the constraints that 𝑥(𝑝0) = 0, 𝑥(^𝑝)≥ 0 for ^𝑝≥𝑝0, and
𝑥(^𝑝)≤ 0 for ^𝑝≤ 𝑝0, we can just equivalently optimize the two integrals arising from the right
hand side of Theorem 3.1 separately to obtain the optimal allocation rule. Additionally, since
𝜑𝑢(𝑝0) =− 1−𝐹 (𝑝0)
𝑓 (𝑝0) ≤ 0, 𝜑𝑢(𝑝max) =𝑝max−𝜋(𝑝0,𝑝 max)≥ 0, 𝜑𝑙(𝑝min) =𝜋(𝑝0,𝑝 min)−𝑝min≥ 0, and
𝜑𝑙(𝑝0) =−𝐹 (𝑝0)
𝑓 (𝑝0)≤ 0, there always exists a non-trivial optimal solution to the optimization problem.
If𝜑𝑢(𝑠) was monotone (increasing), then by the above sign changes, there would exist a (unique)
root 𝑝1 such that 𝜑𝑢(𝑝1) = 0. A simple argument by contradiction then shows that the structure of
the optimal allocation rule is to allocate the maximum allowable quantity of asset (by the constraint
of unit demand, 𝑥(𝑠)≤ 1) to be sold from the price 𝑝1 onwards; that is,
𝑥⋆(𝑠) =
⎧
⎨
⎩
1, for 𝑝1≤𝑠≤𝑝max
0, for 𝑝0≤𝑠<𝑝 1
. (7)
For the lower virtual value function, a similar argument shows that, if 𝜑𝑙(𝑠) was monotone
(decreasing), and 𝑝2 is its unique root (which is guaranteed to exist by the aforementioned sign
changes), then the optimal allocation rule obeying the constraint of unit demand 𝑥(𝑠)≥− 1 would
be
𝑥⋆(𝑠) =
⎧
⎨
⎩
0, for 𝑝2<𝑠 ≤𝑝0
−1, for 𝑝min≤𝑠≤𝑝2
. (8)
In full generality, if the virtual value functions are not monotone, then there may now be
multiple roots of those functions. In this case, and with an argument by contradiction that if the
allocation rule were to switch in between roots then we could obtain better or equal expected profit
by modifying the allocation rule to remain constant in between roots, along with the argument that
if the allocation rule were not to allocate the entire available demand (1, −1, respectively) then we
could obtain better or equal expected profit by increasing (or decreasing, respectively) the allocated
quantity of the asset until the limit (of 1 or −1, respectively), we obtain that the optimal allocation
rule is exactly characterized by Eqs. (7) and (8), where this time the choice of the roots as 𝑝1 (and
𝑝2, respectively) needs to be the root of the upper (lower, respectively) virtual value function that
gives the maximum expected profit under the allocation rule that has the form of Eq. (7) (Eq. (8),
respectively). Therefore, the optimal allocation rule is as per the theorem statement.
Therefore, in any case, we observe that the optimal solution of Eqs. (7) and (8) has a well-
specified no-trade gap around𝑝0 where the market maker is not willing to buy or sell any quantity
of the asset to the trader. More specifically, the length of this no-trade gap is precisely 𝑝1−𝑝2,
where 𝑝1≥ 𝑝0, 𝑝2≤ 𝑝0 are as per the above analysis roots of the upper and lower virtual value
functions respectively.
We can now specialize in the two interesting extreme cases that were examined in Section 1.2
to obtain the respective observations there: first, consider the pure noise trading case, where the
traders are assumed to offer no information on the true asset price, and hence the market maker’s
prior is static, i.e., in the case that the update rule is 𝜋(𝑝0, ^𝑝) = 𝑝0, ∀^𝑝∈ [𝑝min,𝑝 max]. In this
case, we see that there is a non-trivial no-trade gap, since we have for the extremal values that
𝜑𝑢(𝑝0) < 0, 𝜑𝑢(𝑝max) > 0, 𝜑𝑙(𝑝min) > 0, and 𝜑𝑙(𝑝0) < 0 (see the beginning of Section 3.3 for
the expressions), hence the respective roots are contained strictly in between their corresponding
13

===== PAGE 14 =====

intervals (by continuity of the virtual value functions). This no-trade gap is akin to a bid-ask spread
observed in traditional CLOB-based markets, and is attributable to the monopoly pricing power
of the market maker. In addition, it is distribution-dependent and its length can be intuitively
understood as being smaller under distributions 𝒟, according to which the traders’ estimates ^𝑝
are distributed, that are more “concentrated” around 𝑝08. To mention an example that illustrates
this intuition, the no-trade gap under pure noise trading and a uniform distribution supported on
[𝑝(1)
min,𝑝 (1)
max] will be smaller than the one under another uniform distribution supported on [𝑝(2)
min,𝑝 (2)
max],
where 𝑝(1)
min>𝑝 (2)
min and 𝑝(1)
max<𝑝 (2)
max.
At the other extreme, consider the case where the traders always have perfect information about
the true asset price, i.e., the market maker’s update rule is 𝜋(𝑝0, ^𝑝) = ^𝑝, ∀^𝑝∈ [𝑝min,𝑝 max]. In this
case, we observe that the two virtual value functions become
𝜑𝑢(𝑠) =−1−𝐹 (𝑠)
𝑓(𝑠) ≤ 0 and 𝜑𝑙(𝑠) =−𝐹 (𝑠)
𝑓(𝑠)≤ 0,
thus the optimal allocation rule is everywhere zero: 𝑥⋆(^𝑝) = 0, ∀^𝑝∈ [𝑝min,𝑝 max]. It is therefore the
case that this corollary which may be phrased as a version of a no-trade theorem in the presence
of perfect adverse selection is distribution-independent: that is, regardless of the distribution 𝒟 of
the traders’ asset price estimates ^𝑝∼𝒟 , if the market maker believes that the traders have perfect
information, then their optimal allocation rule is to perform no-trade at all. More specifically:
Corollary 3.3 (No-trade theorem when all traders have perfect information) . If the update
rule 𝜋(𝑝0, ^𝑝) = ^𝑝, ∀^𝑝∈ [𝑝min,𝑝 max], then for every distribution 𝒟, the optimal allocation rule is
𝑥⋆(^𝑝) = 0, ∀^𝑝∈ [𝑝min,𝑝 max].
4 An important special case: linear instantiation of the update
rule
We move on to consider an interesting special case of the update rule of Section 3.1: the simplest
specialization that allows us to capture an arbitrary mixture of both noise trading and adverse
selection, and enables us to show exactly how they intermingle with one another. More specifically,
we consider the case when the update rule is a convex combination of the two above extreme cases,
controlled by a parameter 𝜆∈ [0, 1]:
𝜋(𝑝0, ^𝑝) =𝜆𝑝0 + (1−𝜆)^𝑝 (9)
The extreme cases arise as follows: for 𝜆 = 1, we obtain that the update remains the same as
the market maker’s prior (𝑝0), i.e., the pure noise trading model, where the trader is assumed to
provide no information on the asset price. For 𝜆 = 0, we obtain that the update always follows
exactly the trader’s estimate ( ^𝑝), thus the trader is considered as having perfect information around
the asset price, i.e., pure adverse selection is attained.
There are standard normality assumptions under which this linear update rule naturally emerges
as the update rule for Bayesian updating. For example, if we consider that the asset value
8With this statement, we intend to only give intuition around the length of the interval, because there can be
pathological cases of pairs of distributions that do not follow this generic intuition, and hence it need not be true in
full generality.
14

===== PAGE 15 =====

𝑉 ∼𝒩 (𝑝0,𝜎 2
0) where𝒩 is the normal distribution, and the trader’s estimate is ^𝑝 =𝑉 +𝜖, where
𝜖∼𝒩 (0,𝜎 2
𝜖 ), i.e., ^𝑝∼𝒩 (𝑝0,𝜎 2
0 +𝜎2
𝜖 ), then the posterior according to a Bayesian update step would
also be a normal distribution with mean 𝜋(𝑝0, ^𝑝) =𝜆𝑝0 + (1−𝜆)^𝑝, where 𝜆 = 𝜎2
𝜖
𝜎2
0+𝜎2𝜖
(Gelman et al.
2014). Of course, this is just an illustration of the motivation behind the linear update rule; it
ignores the fact that asset prices cannot obtain negative values, but a similar calculation can be
performed for log-normal distributions, for instance, and also holds approximately for truncated
Gaussian distributions in the case of the standard deviation being small compared to the mean
value. However, in this section, we will not be necessarily making any such Gaussian assumptions;
we will only be assuming that the conducted update corresponds to a linear interpolation (in fact,
convex combination) of the two cases of 𝑝0 and ^𝑝 that we have seen in Section 1.2 as indicative of
noise trading and adverse selection.
In order to proceed with a more precise characterization of the interval of no-trade around 𝑝0,
we will make a similar assumption to the regularity of the distribution 𝒟 made by Myerson (1981):
Assumption 2. The upper and lower virtual value functions, obtained by plugging in Eq. (9) to
Eqs. (5) and (6),
𝜑𝑢(𝑠;𝜆) =𝜆(𝑠−𝑝0)− 1−𝐹 (𝑠)
𝑓(𝑠) and 𝜑𝑙(𝑠;𝜆) =𝜆(𝑝0−𝑠)− 𝐹 (𝑠)
𝑓(𝑠)
are non-decreasing and non-increasing (respectively) with respect to 𝑠 for all 𝜆∈ [0, 1].
Discussion of Assumption 2. Assumption 2 can be intuitively understood as stating that the
distribution of ^𝑝 (i.e.,𝒟) does not have heavy tails away from𝑝0 on either direction (i.e., left or right
tails). We now explain in a detailed way why this is the case and why this assumption is standard and
naturally motivated. First, observe that the original regular distributional assumption of Myerson
(1981) is equivalent to the assumption that 𝜑𝑢(𝑠;𝜆) is strictly increasing for 𝜆 = 1. Additionally,
notice that an equivalent re-statement of Assumption 2 is that the respective monotonicities hold
for 𝜆 = 0, since this implies the monotonicities for all 𝜆∈ [0, 1]. In particular, for the monotonicity
of the upper virtual value function, we observe that it exactly corresponds to having a monotone
hazard rate, where the hazard rate of a distribution is defined as
ℎ(𝑠) ≜ 𝑓(𝑠)
1−𝐹 (𝑠).
Distributions that have a monotone hazard rate (MHR) have been widely used before as common
distributional assumptions in revenue maximizing settings (Hartline 2021; Cole and Rao 2017;
Cole and Roughgarden 2014; Ewerhart 2013). More generally, 𝜑𝑢(𝑠;𝜆) being non-decreasing for a
specific 𝜆 corresponds to the notion of an 𝛼-strongly regular distribution (Definition 1.1) of Cole
and Roughgarden (2014) where 𝛼 = 1−𝜆. As for the monotonicity of the lower virtual value
function assumption, we observe that if we make the change of variables 𝑝′ =𝑝0− ^𝑝 (where ^𝑝∼𝒟
is our original random variable, and 𝑝′ is the new one), then 𝜑𝑙(𝑠; 0) being non-increasing would be
equivalent to the distribution of 𝑝′ having a monotone hazard rate (MHR), because if we denote by
𝐺(𝑠) and 𝑔(𝑠) the CDF and the PDF of 𝑝′ respectively, then from standard probabilities, we get
that 𝐺(𝑠) = 1−𝐹 (𝑝0−𝑠), and 𝑔(𝑠) =𝑓(𝑝0−𝑠), hence
𝑔(𝑠)
1−𝐺(𝑠) = 𝑓(𝑝0−𝑠)
𝐹 (𝑝0−𝑠),
15

===== PAGE 16 =====

and 𝜑𝑙(𝑠; 0) =−𝐹 (𝑠)
𝑓 (𝑠) being non-increasing is equivalent to 𝑓 (𝑝0−𝑠)
𝐹 (𝑝0−𝑠) being non-decreasing.
Intuitively, distributions satisfying Assumption 2 are well-behaved, in the sense that they
correspond to distributions with MHR on both of their tails, i.e., distributions that have both left
and right tails that are no heavier than an exponential.
Many interesting distributions satisfy the “non-heavy-tailed” property that Assumption 2 refers
to. For example, all uniform and exponential distributions satisfy the assumption. More generally,
all distributions with log-concave densities have a monotone hazard rate (Ewerhart 2013), and if
centered around 𝑝0 (for instance symmetrically on both sides), both tail ends would not be heavy
and they would satisfy the assumption. As with classical non-MHR distributions, Assumption 2
is not satisfied by most heavy-tailed distributions; the difference is that this assumption includes
both left and right tails of the distribution. A good example of a double-sided (left and right)
heavy-tailed distribution that would fail to satisfy Assumption 2 would be the Cauchy distribution
with a location parameter of 𝑝0, for which the moment generating function does not exist anywhere:
in this case, both of its left and right tails around 𝑝0 are heavy (Mantel 1976).
We now move on to characterize the length of the no-trade interval present in the optimal
solution of Eqs. (7) and (8) as 𝜆 varies.
Proposition 4.1. The length of the no-trade gap in the optimal solution that obtains the maximum
expected profit under Eq. (9) is a decreasing function of 𝜆, when the distribution 𝒟 satisfies
Assumption 2.
Proof. First, observe that under Assumption 2, the optimal allocation rule is exactly characterized
by Eqs. (7) and (8), whereby there exists exactly one root for each of the corresponding upper
and lower virtual value functions. We now need to show how the roots move, while 𝜆 varies. In
particular, we will prove that the root of the upper virtual value function increases as 𝜆 decreases;
the proof that the root of the lower virtual value function decreases is similar. These two combined
facts mean that, as 𝜆 decreases, the length of the interval of no-trade increases (because each of the
roots moves away from 𝑝0), thus proving the desired result.
We finish the proof as follows: consider 𝜆1≤ 𝜆2. The roots 𝑝1,𝑝 2 of the upper virtual value
functions 𝜑𝑢(𝑠;𝜆1),𝜑𝑢(𝑠;𝜆2) for 𝜆1,𝜆 2 respectively satisfy
𝜑𝑢(𝑝1;𝜆1) = 0 and 𝜑𝑢(𝑝2;𝜆2) = (𝜆2−𝜆1)(𝑝2−𝑝0) +𝜑𝑢(𝑝2;𝜆1) = 0.
Additionally, (𝜆2−𝜆1)(𝑝2−𝑝0)≥ 0 since 𝜆1≤𝜆2 and𝑝2≥𝑝0 (by definition of the upper virtual
value function), so the latter equality means that 𝜑𝑢(𝑝2;𝜆1)≤ 0 = 𝜑𝑢(𝑝1;𝜆1). Therefore, by the
monotonicity of 𝜑𝑢(𝑠;𝜆1), the latter is equivalent to the ordering 𝑝2≤𝑝1 of the respective roots, as
desired.
Proposition 4.1 allows us to make precise the important interpretation of how the effects of
monopoly pricing and adverse selection interplay in a model of trading that incorporates both
noise trading and better-informed traders. More specifically, in the optimal solution to the profit
maximization problem of the market maker, there is a minimal interval of no-trade (corresponding
to the pure noise trading case, 𝜆 = 1) that exhibits the monopoly pricing power being the sole
driving force of the shape of the optimal mechanism. As 𝜆 gets smaller, and the market maker’s
model for the trader pre-supposes more and more traders with perfect information, according to
Proposition 4.1, the interval around 𝑝0 on which the AMM is not willing to trade grows larger and
larger. This change is attributed to adverse selection being added in the mixture because of the
16

===== PAGE 17 =====

traders that are better informed than the market maker. At the other extreme, where pure adverse
selection is observed (𝜆 = 0), the optimal solution is to provide no liquidity, or equivalently, perform
no trade. This is a distribution-independent result that is due to the corresponding virtual value
functions (both upper and lower) being purely non-positive in that case (c.f., the expressions of
Assumption 2 for 𝜑𝑢(𝑠; 0) and𝜑𝑙(𝑠; 0) where we substitute 𝜆 = 0), making the optimal solution that
obtains the maximum profit be exactly the no-trade-anywhere solution 𝑥(^𝑝) = 0, ∀𝑝min≤ ^𝑝≤𝑝max.
5 Conclusion and future directions
The goal of this work is to isolate the most essential and salient properties of the problem of optimal
liquidity provision: the zero-sum game between traders and liquidity providers, uncertain valuations,
asymmetric information, and price updates conditioned on trade. We show how a “no-trade gap”
(that arises as a “bid-ask spread” in traditional market microstructure literature for reasons other
than the ones considered here) surprisingly arises in very general settings of liquidity provision in
exchange mechanisms, like the ones we consider, allowing us to unlock a fruitful connection between
optimal market-making and the Myersonian theory of optimal auction design. This connection has
not been made in prior literature to the best of our knowledge.
Our general framework for reasoning about AMMs is based on a Bayesian-like belief inference
procedure. Such Bayesian updating procedures are well-known and widely used in machine learning,
even in the specific context of market-making (Das and Magdon-Ismail 2008). The generality of
our framework has the exact intention of capturing any possible exchange mechanism, including
the most prominent examples of both limit order books and automated market makers (see also
Milionis et al. 2023a). At the same time, for the optimal allocation rule whose structure we hereby
characterize, it would be interesting to give the complexity of the market maker’s computation with
update rules other than the linear one, which we gave as an indicative example of the mixing effects
of both adverse selection and noise trading. In the case of update rules that can arise from an online
learning framework with iterative belief updates, what makes the complexity determination not
straightforwardly arise from these online learning frameworks is exactly the needed calculation of
the roots in Theorem 3.2.
It might seem, at a first glance, that the market maker in the framework given in this work is
not just risk-neutral but also myopic, i.e., maximizes expected profit from the next trade given its
update rule, belief distribution over traders’ estimates, and its own current asset value estimate.
However, our framework can capture much more generic structures of dependencies that allow
the market maker to not be myopic, including a (possibly discounted) cumulative profit/reward
structure. It would be an interesting future direction to examine whether the insights we give in
this work change in such cases; we conjecture that they do not, but additional effects could be
observed. In fact, our Bayesian (update rule) framework can be adjusted to accommodate these
more complicated structures, where the updated belief (through the update rule) can have any
future expectations already baked in. In particular, sequentially, the market maker’s new updated
belief of the prior round of trading becomes their prior belief in the next trade, so that the prior at
each round depends on the entire past history of trades; the update rule at each time holds the best
(future) expectation of the market maker.
Finally, future empirical work that probes the model’s assumptions and results could be explored,
just as empirical work on revenue-maximizing auctions and online learning has served to usefully
probe Myerson’s original theoretical framework.
17

===== PAGE 18 =====

Acknowledgments
The first author is supported in part by NSF awards CNS-2212745, CCF-2212233, DMS-2134059,
and CCF-1763970. The second author is supported by the Briger Family Digital Finance Lab at
Columbia Business School. The third author’s research at Columbia University is supported in part
by NSF awards CNS-2212745, and CCF-2006737.
Disclosures
The second author is an advisor to fintech companies. The third author is Head of Research at a16z
crypto, which reviewed a draft of this article for compliance prior to publication and is an investor
in various decentralized finance projects, including Uniswap, as well as in the crypto ecosystem
more broadly (for general a16z disclosures, see https://www.a16z.com/disclosures/).
References
Abernethy, Jacob and Satyen Kale (2013). “Adaptive Market Making via Online Learning”. In:
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by C.J. Burges, L. Bottou, M. Welling, Z.
Ghahramani, and K.Q. Weinberger. Vol. 26. Curran Associates, Inc.url: https://proceedings.
neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2013/file/995e1fda4a2b5f55ef0df50868bf2a8f-Paper.
pdf.
Alaei, Saeed, Hu Fu, Nima Haghpanah, and Jason Hartline (2013). “The simple economics of
approximately optimal auctions”. In: 2013 IEEE 54th Annual Symposium on Foundations of
Computer Science. IEEE, pp. 628–637.
Angeris, Guillermo and Tarun Chitra (2020). “Improved price oracles: Constant function market
makers”. In: Proceedings of the 2nd ACM Conference on Advances in Financial Technologies ,
pp. 80–91.
Angeris, Guillermo, Alex Evans, and Tarun Chitra (2021a). “Replicating market makers”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:2103.14769.
Angeris, Guillermo, Alex Evans, and Tarun Chitra (2021b). “Replicating monotonic payoffs without
oracles”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.13740 .
Brahma, Aseem, Mithun Chakraborty, Sanmay Das, Allen Lavoie, and Malik Magdon-Ismail (2012).
“A Bayesian Market Maker”. In:Proceedings of the 13th ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce.
EC ’12. Valencia, Spain: Association for Computing Machinery, pp. 215–232.isbn: 9781450314152.
doi: 10.1145/2229012.2229031. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/2229012.2229031.
Bulow, Jeremy and John Roberts (1989). “The Simple Economics of Optimal Auctions”. In:
Journal of Political Economy 97.5, pp. 1060–1090. doi: 10 . 1086 / 261643. eprint: https :
//doi.org/10.1086/261643. url: https://doi.org/10.1086/261643.
Chawla, Shuchi, Jason D Hartline, and Robert Kleinberg (2007). “Algorithmic pricing via virtual
valuations”. In: Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce , pp. 243–251.
Chawla, Shuchi, Jason D Hartline, David L Malec, and Balasubramanian Sivan (2010). “Multi-
parameter mechanism design and sequential posted pricing”. In: Proceedings of the forty-second
ACM symposium on Theory of computing , pp. 311–320.
18

===== PAGE 19 =====

Chawla, Shuchi, Jason D Hartline, and Balasubramanian Sivan (2019). “Optimal crowdsourcing
contests”. In: Games and Economic Behavior 113, pp. 80–96. issn: 0899-8256. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.geb.2015.09.001. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S089982561500127X.
Chen, Y. and D.M Pennock (2007). “A utility framework for bounded-loss market makers”. In:
Proceedings of the 23rd Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI 2007. Vancouver,
BC, Canada, pp. 49–56.
Cole, Richard and Shravas Rao (Dec. 2017). “Applications of 𝛼-Strongly Regular Distributions to
Bayesian Auctions”. In: ACM Trans. Econ. Comput.5.4. issn: 2167-8375. doi: 10.1145/3157083.
url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3157083.
Cole, Richard and Tim Roughgarden (2014). “The sample complexity of revenue maximization”. In:
Proceedings of the forty-sixth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing , pp. 243–252.
Das, Sanmay (2005). “A learning market-maker in the Glosten–Milgrom model”. In: Quantitative
Finance 5.2, pp. 169–180.
Das, Sanmay and Malik Magdon-Ismail (2008). “Adapting to a Market Shock: Optimal Sequential
Market-Making”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Ed. by D. Koller,
D. Schuurmans, Y. Bengio, and L. Bottou. Vol. 21. Curran Associates, Inc. url: https://
proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2008/file/7a614fd06c325499f1680b9896beedeb-
Paper.pdf.
Ewerhart, Christian (2013). “Regular type distributions in mechanism design and 𝜌-concavity”. In:
Economic Theory 53.3. The original publication is available at www.springerlink.com, pp. 591–603.
issn: 0938-2259. doi: 10.1007/s00199-012-0705-3 . url: https://doi.org/10.5167/uzh-
63129.
Fan, Zhou, Francisco J. Marmolejo-Coss´ ıo, Ben Altschuler, He Sun, Xintong Wang, and David
Parkes (2022). “Differential Liquidity Provision in Uniswap v3 and Implications for Contract
Design”. In: Proceedings of the Third ACM International Conference on AI in Finance . ICAIF
’22. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, pp. 9–17. isbn: 9781450393768.
doi: 10.1145/3533271.3561775. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3533271.3561775.
Gelman, Andrew, John B. Carlin, Hal Steven Stern, David B. Dunson, Aki Vehtari, and Donald B.
Rubin (2014). Bayesian data analysis . eng. Third edition. OCLC: 909477393. Boca Raton: CRC
Press. isbn: 9781439898208.
Glosten, Lawrence R (1989). “Insider trading, liquidity, and the role of the monopolist specialist”.
In: Journal of business , pp. 211–235.
Glosten, Lawrence R (1994). “Is the electronic open limit order book inevitable?” In: The Journal
of Finance 49.4, pp. 1127–1161.
Glosten, Lawrence R. and Paul R. Milgrom (1985). “Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist
market with heterogeneously informed traders”. In: Journal of Financial Economics 14.1,
pp. 71–100. issn: 0304-405X. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-405X(85)90044-3 . url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0304405X85900443.
Goyal, Mohak, Geoffrey Ramseyer, Ashish Goel, and David Mazi` eres (2022).Finding the Right Curve:
Optimal Design of Constant Function Market Makers . doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2212.03340. url:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.03340.
Haghpanah, Nima and Jason D Hartline (2015). “Reverse mechanism design”. In: Proceedings of the
Sixteenth ACM Conference on Economics and Computation , pp. 757–758.
19

===== PAGE 20 =====

Hartline, Jason D (2012). “Approximation in mechanism design”. In: American Economic Review
102.3, pp. 330–336.
Hartline, Jason D (2021). “Mechanism design and approximation”. In: Book draft 122.1.
Hartline, Jason D and Tim Roughgarden (2009). “Simple versus optimal mechanisms”. In:Proceedings
of the 10th ACM conference on Electronic commerce , pp. 225–234.
Kyle, Albert S. (1985). “Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading”. In: Econometrica 53.6, pp. 1315–
1335. issn: 00129682, 14680262. url: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1913210 (visited on
05/17/2023).
Kyle, Albert S. (1989). “Informed Speculation with Imperfect Competition”. In: The Review of
Economic Studies 56.3, pp. 317–355. issn: 00346527, 1467937X. url: http://www.jstor.org/
stable/2297551 (visited on 05/17/2023).
Mantel, Nathan (1976). “Tails of Distributions”. In: The American Statistician 30.1, pp. 14–17. issn:
00031305. url: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2682880 (visited on 01/24/2023).
Milionis, Jason, Ciamac C. Moallemi, and Tim Roughgarden (2023a). “Complexity-Approximation
Trade-offs in Exchange Mechanisms: AMMs vs. LOBs”. In: Financial Cryptography and Data
Security. Springer International Publishing. isbn: 978-3-031-47753-9.
Milionis, Jason, Ciamac C. Moallemi, and Tim Roughgarden (2023b). “Extended Abstract: The
Effect of Trading Fees on Arbitrage Profits in Automated Market Makers”. In: Financial
Cryptography and Data Security. FC 2023 International Workshops . Springer International
Publishing. isbn: 978-3-031-48805-4.
Milionis, Jason, Ciamac C. Moallemi, Tim Roughgarden, and Anthony Lee Zhang (2022). “Quanti-
fying Loss in Automated Market Makers”. In: Proceedings of the 2022 ACM CCS Workshop
on Decentralized Finance and Security. DeFi’22. Los Angeles, CA, USA: Association for Com-
puting Machinery, pp. 71–74. isbn: 9781450398824. doi: 10.1145/3560832.3563441 . url:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3560832.3563441.
Myerson, Roger B. (1981). “Optimal Auction Design”. In: Mathematics of Operations Research 6.1,
pp. 58–73. issn: 0364765X, 15265471. url: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3689266 (visited
on 01/22/2023).
Neuder, Michael, Rithvik Rao, Daniel J Moroz, and David C Parkes (2021). “Strategic liquidity
provision in uniswap v3”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.12033 .
O’Hara, Maureen (2011). Market microstructure theory. eng. repr. Malden, Mass.: Blackwell. isbn:
9780631207610.
Roughgarden, Tim and Inbal Talgam-Cohen (2016). “Optimal and robust mechanism design with
interdependent values”. In: ACM Transactions on Economics and Computation (TEAC) 4.3,
pp. 1–34.
Roughgarden, Tim and Inbal Talgam-Cohen (2019). “Approximately optimal mechanism design”.
In: Annual Review of Economics 11, pp. 355–381.
Yin, Jimmy and Mac Ren (2021). “On Liquidity Mining for Uniswap v3”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.05800.
20