

===== PAGE 1 =====

Blockchain scaling and liquidity concentration on
decentralized exchanges∗
Basile Caparros†, Amit Chaudhary ‡, Olga Klein §
March 20, 2024
Abstract
Liquidity providers (LPs) on decentralized exchanges (DEXs) can protect them-
selves from adverse selection risk by updating their positions more frequently. How-
ever, repositioning is costly, because LPs have to pay gas fees for each update. We
analyze the causal relation between repositioning and liquidity concentration around
the market price, using the entry of blockchain scaling solutions, Arbitrum and Poly-
gon, as our instruments. Lower gas fees on scaling solutions allow LPs to update more
frequently than on Ethereum. Our results demonstrate that higher repositioning inten-
sity and precision lead to greater liquidity concentration, which benefits small trades
by reducing their slippage.
JEL classifications: G14, G18, G19
Keywords: decentralized exchanges, FinTech, gas fees, liquidity concentration, market
depth, slippage
∗We would like to thank Marius Zoican, Alfred Lehar, Gleb Kurovskiy, Fahad Saleh, Norman Sch¨ urhoff,
Andrea Barbon, Fay¸ cal Drissi, Ganesh Viswanath-Natraj, Roman Kozhan, Nir Chemaya, Dingyue Liu, Peter
O’Neill and seminar participants at Warwick Business School, Gillmore Center for Financial Technology,
UCSB-ECON DeFi Seminar, World Federation of Exchanges and Oxford-Man Institute (OMI) Finance
Seminar for insightful comments on this paper. This paper has been presented at the 2023 Edinburgh
Economics of Financial Technology Conference and 6th Sydney Market Microstructure and Digital Finance
Meeting. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships
that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research did not receive any
specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
†ChainSolid (basile@chainsolid.com)
‡Warwick Business School, Gillmore Centre for Financial Technology (amit.chaudhary.3@warwick.ac.uk),
ChainSolid (amit@chainsolid.com) - I thank Prabal Banerjee for valuable feedback and comments.
§Warwick Business School, Gillmore Center for Financial Technology (olga.klein@wbs.ac.uk)
arXiv:2306.17742v4  [q-fin.TR]  18 Mar 2024

===== PAGE 2 =====

1 Introduction
One of the major cryptoasset exchanges, FTX, filed for bankruptcy on November 11, 2022.
Crucially, FTX kept custody of its client deposits. Thus, whereas the exact reasons for its
collapse were the subject of investigation by the US Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC), at least $1B of its customers’ funds have vanished, according to Reuters1. FTX was a
centralized exchange (CEX), with all trades taking place through a limit order book (LOB).
In any LOB-based market, a central institution, such as FTX, is needed to match trades and
keep records of all transactions.
A recent alternative to CEXs are so-called decentralized exchanges (DEXs) that operate
directly on the blockchain. In contrast to CEXs, users themselves keep custody of their
assets on DEXs. They execute their trades directly from their wallet, using smart contracts,
i.e. a set of pre-programmed rules. 2 Therefore, executing directly on the blockchain provides
higher level of security for clients’ funds. Indeed, there is evidence of significant trading
volume shifting to DEXs in the week of FTX collapse. According to Reuters, “volumes at
the largest DEX, Uniswap, spiked to $17.2 billion in the week of Nov 6-13, from just over
$6 billion the week before”. 3
This higher level of security on DEXs comes, however, at a cost. First, transactions
are overall slower, since they have to be validated by “miners” or “validators” before being
recorded on the blockchain. Second, users of the blockchain have to compensate validators
with the so-called “gas fees” for their efforts. Importantly, “gas fees” are paid not only by
liquidity demanders, but also by liquidity providers (LPs). Essentially, gas fees represent
1“Exclusive: At least $1 billion of client funds missing at failed crypto firm FTX”, Reuters, November
13, 2022. Available at https://www.reuters.com/markets/currencies/exclusive-least-1-billion-client-funds-
missing-failed-crypto-firm-ftx-sources-2022-11-12/
2Aspris et al. (2021) also argue that decentralized exchanges have higher security, because assets are
never transferred to the custody of a third party. Lehar and Parlour (2021) and Barbon and Ranaldo (2021)
provide a comprehensive overview of differences between CEXs and DEXs. However, allowing users to keep
custody of their own assets is the most important advantage of DEXs.
3“Cryptoverse: Let’s talk about DEX, baby”, Reuters, November 22, 2022. Available at
https://www.reuters.com/markets/currencies/cryptoverse-lets-talk-about-dex-baby-2022-11-22/
1

===== PAGE 3 =====

a fixed cost and act as a “transaction tax” for every transaction added to the blockchain.
Liquidity demanders pay gas fees whenever they would like to execute a trade. 4 Liquidity
providers pay gas fees whenever they deposit or withdraw liquidity from the exchange.
In this paper, we analyze the effects of repositioning intensity, i.e. frequency of position
updates by LPs, on liquidity concentration on the largest DEX, Uniswap v3. Much alike
traditional market makers, LPs are subject to adverse selection risk (). To protect themselves
from being adversely selected, LPs need to update their positions in response to changes in
the market price, similar to canceling and reposting limit orders in the LOB. With lower
gas fees, it is cheaper for LPs to update their liquidity positions. Consequently, they can
reposition more frequently, which results in better protection from adverse selection. 5 With
better protection from adverse selection, LPs can earn higher fees (for the same amount
of capital deposited) by setting narrower price ranges around the market price, i.e. their
positions become more concentrated. Thus, we expect that a higher repositioning intensity
by LPs leads to higher concentration of aggregate liquidity around the market price.
In contrast, if gas fees are high, LPs should only update their positions if the market price
sufficiently deviates from their position’s price range, as repositioning is costly. Therefore,
we expect LPs to set wider price ranges when they are not able to update frequently, in
order to reduce adverse selection risk. Lower repositioning intensity should thus result in
lower concentration of aggregate liquidity in the pool. Overall, concentration of aggregate
pool liquidity around the market price is important, because higher liquidity concentration
translates into lower slippage and thus lower execution cost for traders.
Testing the empirical relation between repositioning intensity and liquidity concentration
might be problematic, because repositioning intensity is potentially endogenous. A choice of
an LP to update their position can in itself depend on the current liquidity concentration in
4Gas fees are in addition to standard exchange fees that both CEXs and DEXs charge for trade execution.
Prior findings by Barbon and Ranaldo (2021) suggest that gas fees on the main blockchain for DEXs,
Ethereum, indeed represent a considerable portion of execution cost for traders on Uniswap v2.
5Lehar et al. (2022) discuss trading mechanics on Uniswap v3 in great detail and also argue that liquidity
updating should be more frequent with lower gas fees.
2

===== PAGE 4 =====

the pool. To identify the causal effect of repositioning intensity, we use the launch of Uniswap
v3 on two Ethereum scaling solutions, Arbitrum and Polygon, as our instruments. Blockchain
scaling solutions allow for a quicker validation of transactions, with an average block time
of 0.25-3 seconds, relative to Ethereum’s 12 seconds. 6 Moreover, scaling solutions charge
significantly lower gas fees of only around $0.01 on Polygon and $0.20-$2 on Arbitrum per
trade on Uniswap v3, as compared to an average gas fee of $14 on Ethereum. Importantly,
lower gas fees on scaling solutions allow LPs to update their positions more frequently.
Therefore, we use the launch of Uniswap v3 on scaling solutions as our instrument for an
exogenous increase in repositioning intensity of LPs.
We test our predictions above using the two most liquid pairs on Uniswap v3, ETH/USDC
0.05% and ETH/USDC 0.3%, that are traded across all three chains: Ethereum, Arbitrum
and Polygon. Hence, our benchmark dataset consists of six distinct liquidity pools. 7 Our
sample period starts in January 2022, after the launch of Uniswap v3 on both Arbitrum and
Polygon, and ends in June 2023.
We first examine trading volume, trade size and total value locked (TVL) in liquidity
pools across all chains. 8 Overall, we observe significantly larger trades, volumes and TVL
on Ethereum, relative to scaling solutions. These results are largely due to higher security
of Ethereum, driven by its high number of validators. In contrast, LPs are more reluctant to
deposit large amounts of liquidity on less secure scaling solutions, resulting in a lower overall
TVL. Similar to a separating equilibrium, larger TVL on Ethereum attracts larger trades,
for which greater liquidity is more important than high gas fees. In contrast, blockchain
scaling solutions are more attractive for smaller liquidity providers and smaller traders, who
6There is a trade-off between quicker transaction validation and security of scaling solutions, which we
discuss in detail in Section 2.2. See also Chemaya and Liu (2022) for estimation of investors’ preferences for
blockchain security, using a structural model.
7The sample of pools that are traded across all three chains and are still sufficiently liquid is quite limited.
We also replicate our main results for four additional pairs, BTC/ETH 0.05%, BTC/ETH 0.3%, UNI/ETH
0.3% and LINK/ETH 0.3%, that are relatively actively traded across all three chains, thus mapping into
twelve additional pools. All our main results are robust and continue to hold for these four additional pairs.
8Total value locked (TVL) is equivalent to total market depth in the traditional LOB.
3

===== PAGE 5 =====

are primarily concerned about gas fees, and less so about security.
Importantly, despite their lower TVL, we observe higher aggregate liquidity concentration
around the market price on blockchain scaling solutions. Our benchmark measure of liquidity
concentration is market depth within 2% of the market price, divided by TVL (i.e. total
market depth).9 We hypothesize that this higher liquidity concentration is caused by higher
repositioning intensity of LPs on Arbitrum and Polygon. As discussed above, we use the
launch of Uniswap v3 on Arbitrum and Polygon as an instrument for an exogenous increase
in updating frequency of LPs. Our findings from instrumental variable regressions provide
strong supporting evidence for our predictions, suggesting that an increase in repositioning
intensity indeed leads to greater concentration of liquidity around the market price. A one-
standard deviation increase in repositioning intensity results in a 4.38% increase in liquidity
concentration. This value is economically significant, because it represents a 43% increase
from the average liquidity concentration of 10.16% on Ethereum.
One potential concern could be that, whereas liquidity providers increase intensity of
their repositioning, they do not necessarily reposition close to the new market price. Fur-
ther, although a position might be centered around the market price, it might still have
a wide price range. To address these issues, we also run instrumental variable regressions
for three measures of repositioning precision of LPs: the average gap between the midprice
of their positions and the market price; the average range length of their positions; and
the average position precision, which combines the previous two measures. Consistent with
our expectations, we find that an increase in repositioning precision also results in greater
concentration of liquidity around the market price.
An increase in aggregate liquidity concentration is important, because it reduces slippage,
for a given TVL. We define the slippage of a trade as the difference between its average
execution price and the pre-execution market price. Indeed, we find that small trades (up
to $5K) have significantly lower slippage on scaling solutions, compared to Ethereum. In
9All our results hold if we use 1% or 10% as a cutoff instead of 2%.
4

===== PAGE 6 =====

contrast, large trades have lower slippage on Ethereum due to its larger TVL.
In the last part of our analysis, we address a potential concern that higher liquidity
concentration is not necessarily driven by higher repositioning intensity, but is rather an
equilibrium outcome of liquidity provision on scaling solutions. Specifically, we use an ex-
ogenous shock to repositioning intensity within Arbitrum chain, related to the airdrop of
Arbitrum’s native token ARB on March 23, 2023. Uniswap was entitled to 4.3M ARB to-
kens, which were used to incentivize LPs to stay active and re-position in the market price
range to maximize their rewards. Arguably, if a shock occurs within the same chain, all
chain’s parameters, such as chain security, expected trading size etc., should remain con-
stant. Thus, changes in liquidity concentration can indeed be attributed to an increase in
repositioning activity of LPs. Consistent with our expectations, we find that an increase
in repositioning intensity on Arbitrum after the airdrop has a more pronounced effect on
aggregate liquidity concentration, relative to the pre-airdrop sample.
Overall, our findings are important, because they show that blockchain scaling solutions
already represent a viable alternative to Ethereum for small traders and liquidity providers.
Specifically, their lower gas fees allow small liquidity providers to better manage their posi-
tions, protecting themselves from adverse selection. In turn, higher repositioning intensity
and precision of LPs leads to higher liquidity concentration, which especially benefits small
traders by reducing their slippage.
Our paper contributes to the emerging literature on decentralized exchanges. First studies
on decentralized exchanges focus their analysis on a particular subclass of automated market
makers (AMMs), the constant product market makers (CPMMs), on the example of Uniswap
v2. CPMMs do not allow liquidity providers to set a price range for their positions (). Hence,
the only decision of a liquidity provider on Uniswap v2 is whether to provide liquidity or
not in a specific pool. Lehar and Parlour (2021), Capponi and Jia (2021) and Foley et al.
(2023) show that liquidity providers on AMMs are subject to adverse selection by competing
arbitrageurs. In this setup, Lehar and Parlour (2021) and Foley et al. (2023) show how pool
5

===== PAGE 7 =====

size acts as an equilibrating force in AMMs. Pools with higher adverse selection problem
will experience more liquidity withdrawals and therefore reduce to an optimal size, in which
average earned fees compensate liquidity providers in taking adverse selection risk. Lehar and
Parlour (2021) do not explicitly analyze the role of gas fees, and treat them as an important
pre-commitment by liquidity providers not to withdraw liquidity from the AMM. Barbon
and Ranaldo (2021) compare transaction cost and price efficiency among DEXs and CEXs,
taking gas fees into consideration. They show that transaction costs are approximately
comparable on CEXs and DEXs. Whereas CEXs are superior in terms of price efficiency,
DEXs eliminate custodian risk.
To the best of our knowledge, there are currently only few papers that analyze liquidity
provision on Uniswap v3. Importantly, Uniswap v3 allows LPs to set price ranges for their
positions, similar to limit orders in limit order books. Hasbrouck et al. (2022) show theo-
retically that higher-fee pools attract more liquidity providers, which reduces price impact
of trades and increases the equilibrium trading volume. Hasbrouck et al. (2023) and Cartea
et al. (2023) theoretically model optimal liquidity provision on DEXs with concentrated
liquidity (e.g., Uniswap v3). Chemaya and Liu (2022) estimate investors’ preferences for
blockchain security on scaling solutions, using a structural model.Lehar et al. (2022) focus
their analysis on liquidity fragmentation across low- and high-fee pools on Ethereum. They
argue that low-fee pools require more frequent updating in response to a higher trading
volume, catering mostly to large LPs. High-fee pools are rather attractive for passive small
(retail) LPs, due to their lower liquidity management cost. Their model also predicts that,
in presence of very low gas fees, all liquidity consolidates in a low-fee pool. Indeed, we find
strong supporting evidence for this prediction in our paper, on an example of low- and high-
fee pools on Arbitrum and Polygon. In contrast to Lehar et al. (2022), the main focus of
our study is the effect of repositioning intensity and precision of LPs on aggregate liquidity
concentration around the market price.
6

===== PAGE 8 =====

2 The landscape of cryptoassets markets
2.1 Centralized vs decentralized exchanges
Cryptoassets are currently traded on two different types of exchanges: centralized ex-
changes (CEXs) and decentralized exchanges (DEXs). Centralized exchanges, such as Bi-
nance, Kraken, Coinbase (and previously, FTX) operate using limit order books. Figure 1
presents a snapshot of Binance BTC/USDT limit order book, with the bid side (in green)
representing the cumulative BTC quantity of buy limit orders, and the ask side (in red)
representing the cumulative BTC quantity of sell limit orders. In limit order markets, liq-
uidity is usually provided by professional market makers, who strategically compete with
each other by submitting limit orders.
[Insert Figure 1 approximately here]
In contrast, decentralized exchanges operate directly on a blockchain, with liquidity usu-
ally provided through an “automated market maker” (AMM). An AMM just follows a set
of pre-programmed rules, so-called “smart contracts”, such that there is no explicit human
intervention required when a trade (or a so-called “swap”) is submitted. Each asset pair,
for example, ETH/USDC, comprises a separate liquidity pool. Liquidity providers (LPs),
including retail investors, can deposit (“mint”) liquidity to the pool by adding both assets,
or so-called tokens, in a respective ratio. They can also withdraw (“burn”) liquidity from
the pool at a later point in time. Liquidity demanders (traders) can then swap one token for
another in the pool at the current market price. Thus, in contrast to limit order markets,
proper matching of buy and sell orders is not required in an AMM. All trades are executed
against the AMM, with the market price determined by mathematical formulas in smart
contracts. Liquidity demanders pay a pre-specified exchange fee, e.g. 0.3%, for each trade
as a compensation to liquidity providers. Both liquidity demanders and liquidity providers
have to pay additional transaction fees, so-called “gas fees”, as a compensation to miners
who actually record their transactions (i.e. “swaps”, “mints”, “burns”) on the blockchain.
7

===== PAGE 9 =====

Importantly, DEXs users keep custody of their assets, because they execute trades from their
own wallets and settlement is immediate. 10
Uniswap is the leading decentralized exchange, with its first version, Uniswap v1, launched
on Ethereum on November 2, 2018. The main drawback of Uniswap v1 is that it only sup-
ports trading against ETH, i.e. selling DAI for USDC requires two transactions: first, selling
DAI for ETH and, second, ETH for USDC. To overcome this problem, Uniswap v2 was re-
leased in May 2020. Importantly, Uniswap v2 does not allow for competition of liquidity
providers. The only decision liquidity providers make is whether to deposit liquidity in the
pool or not. The trading fee equals 0.3% for all pools on Uniswap v2. Fees earned from
trades are distributed pro-rata to liquidity providers, i.e. in proportion to the amount of liq-
uidity they provide in the pool. Therefore, all gains (and losses) are mutualized by liquidity
providers.
The latest version, Uniswap v3, was released in May 2021, implementing two main
changes to Uniswap v2. First, it allows some degree of competition on price between liq-
uidity providers by introducing the so-called “concentrated liquidity”. Specifically, when
depositing their tokens, LPs can now indicate the price range, i.e. the minimum and the
maximum prices in a given pool at which their liquidity position is active. However, there is
no competition on speed available, as all gains for LPs within the same price range are still
mutualized. Second, Uniswap v3 allows for four various fee tiers: 0.01%, 0.05%, 0.3% and
1%. Therefore, the same pair of assets can potentially be traded in four different pools. 11
We discuss mechanics of trading on Uniswap v3 in more detail in Appendix B.
As of August 2022, $914B were traded on CEXs, out of which $443B were traded on
Binance. Panel A of Figure 2 shows monthly traded volume on CEXs (in $) from May 2017
10Barbon and Ranaldo (2021) provide an excellent overview of additional differences between CEXs and
DEXs, relating to custody of assets, fees accrual, etc.
11In contrast to Uniswap v2, fees earned by LPs are no longer deposited in the pool as liquidity. Instead,
fee earnings in Uniswap v3 are stored separately and can be withdrawn any time by LPs.
8

===== PAGE 10 =====

to April 2023 12. Among all CEXs, Binance is dominating, with an average market share of
50%.
[Insert Figure 2 approximately here]
Total traded volume on DEXs is 12 times lower than on CEXs as of August 2022, around
$75B. However, it fluctuates considerably, with high values of $182B in November 2021 and
$112B in March 2023, and low values of $39B in December 2022. Panel B of Figure 2 shows
monthly trading volume on DEXs (in $) from January 2020 to April 2023. Uniswap v3 is
the leading DEX with a market share of 58% in August 2022, followed by PancakeSwap
with 11% and Curve with 8%. As Uniswap v3 is leading in terms of its market share among
DEXs, we focus our analysis on this DEX in our paper.
2.2 Blockchain scaling solutions: Arbitrum and Polygon
Whereas Ethereum is currently the most secure blockchain with a number of validators
exceeding 500,000 as of January 2023, its main disadvantage is low scalability. Specifically, a
block is added to Ethereum every 12 seconds after the so-called Merge, i.e. when Ethereum
moved to proof-of-stake consensus on September 15, 2022. Previously, with the proof-of-work
consensus, block time was probabilistic and averaged between 13-15 seconds. Importantly,
low scalability of Ethereum results in high gas fees, with an estimated average of gas fees for
a trade on Uniswap v3 amounting to $14 in 2022. 13
To address the scalability issue, there exist overlays of Ethereum that offer higher speed
and, more importantly, lower gas fees. Arbitrum and Polygon are two of the most adopted
Ethereum scaling solutions. Currently, Uniswap v3 has also launched on the following
Ethereum scaling solutions: Optimism, Celo, BNB Smart Chain, Base and Avalanche. We
12Source: The Block, https://www.theblock.co/data.
13See Appendix A.
9

===== PAGE 11 =====

conduct our study on Arbitrum and Polygon, because they have the highest total value
locked (TVL) and trading volume, in comparison to other solutions. 14
2.2.1 Entry of Arbitrum
Uniswap v3 launched on Arbitrum on August 31, 2021. Arbitrum is a “rollup”, i.e. a Layer 2
(L2) scaling solution that involves “rolling up”, or accumulating, transactions on Arbitrum in
“batches”, subsequently compressing them and posting them on the Layer 1, i.e. Ethereum.
This periodic posting allows Arbitrum to inherit Ethereum’s security, subject to the posting
delay. Arbitrum uses a particular type of rollup - so-called optimistic rollup - that processes
off-chain transactions optimistically, assuming validity by default and relying on occasional
on-chain verification.15
The main benefit of rollups is that the Layer 1 blockchain, i.e. Ethereum, does not need
to validate separate transactions, but only batches of transactions. Therefore, Arbitrum (and
other rollups) can offer higher speed by processing and batching transactions off-Ethereum
before settling them on the main network.16 Average block time on Arbitrum was around 1-2
seconds at the beginning of 2022, subsequently dropping to around 0.25 seconds in 2023. 17.
Importantly, transaction batching also allows rollups to offer much lower gas fees than
Ethereum. Indeed, the gas price of a transaction on Arbitrum can be split into two parts:
a part linked to the rollup network itself, which can be considered stable (it starts at 0.1
Gwei, i.e. one-billionth of ETH, and can increase with congestion), and a part linked to the
posting of batches on Ethereum, which varies depending on Ethereum’s gas price. Batch
14As of January 2023, total monthly trading volume on Arbitrum and Polygon equals $2.1B and $1.93B,
respectively. The corresponding number for Optimism is $1.1B. Total monthly trading volume never exceeds
$300M in 2023 for other solutions. See https://info.uniswap.org/ for current TVL and volume across all
Ethereum scaling solutions.
15Another category of rollups are so-called ZK (zero-knowledge) rollups, as zkSync or Polygon zkEVM. In
contrast to optimistic rollups, ZK rollups use zero-knowledge proofs for non-interactive and cryptographically
secure validation of off-chain transactions.
16See https://docs.arbitrum.io/intro for details.
17Source: https://arbiscan.io/chart/tx
10

===== PAGE 12 =====

data is compressed to reduce the cost of posting on Ethereum as much as possible. 18 Still,
posting batches on Ethereum represents a significant cost for rollups, with Arbitrum offering
gas fees between $0.2 and $2 for a trade on Uniswap v3. 19
2.2.2 Entry of Polygon
Uniswap v3 launched on Polygon PoS (proof-of-stake) four months later than on Arbitrum, in
December 2021. Polygon PoS is different to rollups, because it is a sidechain that requires its
own security and decentralization efforts. In contrast to Arbitrum and other rollups, it does
not automatically derive its security from the main blockchain, i.e. Ethereum. Specifically,
Polygon is secured by a proof-of-stake consensus mechanism. However, Polygon still depends
on Ethereum, because all the staking management is defined on Ethereum 20 The overall
number of validators on Polygon is lower, compared to Ethereum, but it still has a decent
level of decentralization with over 100 unique validators. Whereas security of Polygon is
not as robust as Ethereum’s, fewer validators can achieve consensus more quickly, hence
leading to a shorter time between blocks and higher overall throughput. 21 Average block
time on Polygon is around 2-3 seconds, compared to Ethereum’s 12 seconds.22 Thus, Polygon
can handle around 700 transactions per second (TPS) 23, up to 70 times Ethereum’s TPS 24.
Further, Polygon’s gas fees are the lowest, around $0.01 per transaction. 25
18For details of gas fee estimation on Arbitrum, see https://docs.arbitrum.io/devs-how-tos/how-to-
estimate-gas.
19Based on Uniswap v3 frontend, https://app.uniswap.org/swap?chain=arbitrum
20While validators are required to stake MATIC tokens to secure the network, users stake them in an
Ethereum smart contract while bridging assets to Polygon.
21Chemaya and Liu (2022) discuss in detail the trade-off between security and scalability of Ethereum
scaling solutions, including Polygon.
22See https://polygonscan.com/chart/blocks.
23Source: Polygon’s blog, https://polygon.technology/blog/what-do-you-prefer-maximum-security-or-
cheaper-transactions.
24Source: Binance Academy, https://academy.binance.com/en/glossary/transactions-per-second-tps.
25Polygon’s base gas fee is around $0.01 per transaction, but users can also add so-called gas tips to miners
to prioritize the order of their transaction within the block. Still, most of transactions on Polygon only cost
11

===== PAGE 13 =====

Polygon’s and Arbitrum’s liquidity pools are separate to those on Ethereum, i.e. liquidity
is fragmented across pools. Thus, the same liquidity pool, ETH/USDC 0.05% for example,
can exist on multiple chains, Ethereum, Polygon, Arbitrum and other scaling solutions. In
our following analysis, we use the launch of Uniswap v3 on Arbitrum and Polygon as an
instrument to identify the effect of lower gas fees on liquidity and its distribution around the
market price.
3 Data and summary statistics
We analyze the two most liquid pairs on Uniswap v3, ETH/USDC 0.05% and ETH/USDC
0.3%, that are traded across all three chains: Ethereum, Arbitrum and Polygon. Hence,
our benchmark sample consists of six distinct pools. 26 For comparability across chains, we
always use ETH as the base token and USDC as the quote token, i.e all data are presented
for the ETH/USDC pair. ETH/USDC 0.05% is a low-fee pool that charges 5bp for each
trade, or swap (in addition to the gas fee on the respective chain). ETH/USDC 0.3% is a
high-fee pool that charges 30bp for each swap (in addition to the gas fee). 27
We also replicate our main results for four additional pairs, BTC/ETH 0.05%, BTC/ETH
0.3%, UNI/ETH 0.3% and LINK/ETH 0.3%, in Tables IA2 and IA4 in the Internet Ap-
pendix. We choose these pairs because they are among few that are relatively actively
traded across all three chains, mapping into twelve additional pools. For our analysis, we
require a pair to be traded across all three chains. Further, we need it to be relatively liquid
to be able to identify the effect of repositioning intensity. Hence, the sample of pools that
satisfy the two criteria above is quite limited.
Our sample period starts after the launch of Uniswap v3 on Polygon, on January 1,
a few cents in gas fees.
26All pools on Uniswap v3 use wrapped ETH (WETH) instead of Ethereum’s native ETH as they only
support ERC-20 tokens.
27Lehar et al. (2022) show that liquidity on Ethereum is fragmented across low- and high-fee pools due to
different economies of scale across LPs.
12

===== PAGE 14 =====

2022, and ends on June 30, 2023. 28 We download historical logs of Ethereum, Arbitrum and
Polygon transactions (swaps, mints and burns on Uniswap v3), using The Graph queries.
Panel A of Table 1 compares volume and liquidity for both low- and high-fee pools across
Ethereum, Arbitrum and Polygon. Specifically, we report the average trading volume over
the previous 24 hours and the average liquidity size, measured as total value locked (TVL),
both in $M.29
[Insert Table 1 approximately here]
Unsurprisingly, both volume and TVL on Ethereum significantly exceed those on scal-
ing solutions. For example, the average 24-hour volume for Ethereum’s most liquid pool,
ETH/USDC 0.05%, is $513.73M, around 10 times higher than Arbitrum’s $51.93M and 18
times higher than Polygon’s $29.03M. Ethereum’s average TVL of $201.19M is around 11
times higher than Arbitrum’s $18.04M and around 20 times higher than Polygon’s TVL of
$10.26M. Notably, the turnover, measured as the ratio of volume to TVL, is approximately
the same across all three chains (as reported in the last column of Table 1). We observe
much lower trading volume and TVL for the high-fee pool, ETH/USDC 0.3%, especially on
Arbitrum and Polygon. These findings are consistent with theoretical predictions of Lehar
et al. (2022) that lower gas fees lead to lower fragmentation of liquidity across high- and
low-fee pools. As gas fees on Arbitrum and Polygon are relatively cheap, it is optimal for
LPs to actively manage their positions in the low-fee pool. Thus, most of liquidity provision
takes place on the low-fee pool on Arbitrum and Polygon, and not on the high-fee pool.
We further provide summary statistics of trade sizes and trade frequencies in Panels B and
C of Table 1. Panel B shows that the average trade size on Ethereum is significantly larger
for both pools. For example, the average trade size for ETH/USDC 0.05% on Ethereum is
28Prior to 2022, there was not enough trading volume on any of blockchain scaling solutions. For this
reason, we start our sample at the beginning of 2022.
29Total value locked (TVL) on DEXs corresponds to aggregate market depth on CEXs, i.e. total liquidity
available on both bid and ask sides of the limit order book.
13

===== PAGE 15 =====

around $72K. In contrast, Arbitrum’s and Polygon’s average trade size for this pool are much
lower, around $4K and $2.5K, respectively. We observe even lower trade sizes on Arbitrum
and Polygon for ETH/USDC 0.3%, most likely because of their overall lower TVL on these
scaling solutions. In contrast, we observe that the high-fee pool has a larger average trade
size of $116K on Ethereum, compared to the low-fee pool. This finding is consistent with the
theory of Hasbrouck et al. (2022) that pools with higher fees attract more liquidity providers,
increasing their TVL and attracting larger trades.
Panel C of Table 1 reports the average daily number of trades as well as the average
daily number of purchases and sales across the three chains. Strikingly, both Arbitrum and
Polygon have almost twice as many trades, around 12.5K per day, compared to Ethereum’s
7K for ETH/USDC 0.05%. For ETH/USDC 0.3%, the number of trades is approximately
the same across all chains. For all pools, the order flow is balanced, i.e. the average daily
number of buys is approximately equal to the average daily number of sells. We also report
the average time between the trades (in seconds) in the last column. Overall, we conclude
that the higher volume on Ethereum is mostly driven by larger trades being executed on
this chain. In contrast, Arbitrum and Polygon are rather used by smaller traders who trade
more frequently.
As discussed in Section 2.2, Ethereum’s larger liquidity can be explained by its higher
security. Liquidity providers would like to minimize the risk of losing their funds, especially
so for large liquidity deposits. Therefore, Ethereum is mostly used for large liquidity deposits,
resulting in higher TVL. Large traders are also attracted to Ethereum, both due to its higher
security and larger liquidity, which helps them reduce the slippage of their trades. Since
gas fees are fixed, they are not of primary concern for large traders. In contrast, blockchain
scaling solutions are rather attractive for smaller traders, who are primarily concerned about
gas fees, and less so about security. Thus, we observe a separating equilibrium, in which
large traders and LPs choose Ethereum due to its higher security, whereas small traders and
LPs choose Arbitrum and Polygon due to their lower gas fees.
14

===== PAGE 16 =====

Table 2 reports summary statistics of control variables, which we use later in our regres-
sions: trading volume over the previous 24 hours, V olume, (in $M); the 1-minute return of
ETH/USD, Return (in bp); and the realized volatility of ETH/USD, V olatility, computed
as the square root of the sum of squared 1-minute returns over the previous 24 hours (in %).
Both V olatilityand Return are based on a single time series for ETH/USD from Binance.
1-minute returns are strongly balanced, with positive and negative returns being of approx-
imately the same magnitude, with both the average and the median Return close to zero.
The average daily realized volatility of 3.53% of ETH/USD corresponds to an annualized
volatility of 67.44%. Appendix E provides a detailed description of all variable definitions.
4 Repositioning and liquidity concentration
In this section, we test the effect of lower gas fees, provided by blockchain scaling solutions,
on liquidity concentration around the current pool price. We start with formulating our
hypotheses in Section 4.1. We then test the causal relation between repositioning intensity
and liquidity concentration, using instrumental variable regressions, in Section 4.2. Section
4.3 examines the causal relation between repositioning precision and liquidity concentration.
4.1 Hypotheses development
Higher speed of transaction processing and lower gas fees on blockchain scaling solutions
allow liquidity providers to update their positions more frequently. Should a permanent price
change occur, LPs can withdraw and re-deposit their positions, re-setting the price range
around the new market price more quickly and at a cheaper cost. Thus, higher speed and
lower gas fees help LPs better protect their positions from adverse selection by arbitrageurs.
Being able to better protect themselves, LPs can earn higher fees (for the same deposited
amount) by concentrating their positions around the market price.
In contrast, when updating is costly, we expect LPs to post their liquidity on wider
15

===== PAGE 17 =====

price ranges. In absence of updating, posting on a wider range provides better protection
from adverse selection relative to a narrow price range. 30 Therefore, we expect less frequent
updating when gas fees are higher, with LPs updating their positions only if the market
price significantly deviates from the position range. Wider liquidity positions should then
result in less concentrated aggregate liquidity around the market price.
[Insert Figure 3 approximately here]
Figure 3 further illustrates our predictions with a stylized numerical example. In Panel A,
we assume that ETH price (in USDC) experiences a permanent increase from 1,000 to 2,000.
Without updating, an LP’s position is adversely selected by an arbitrageur, who submits a
buy trade. The arbitrageur’s trade moves the market price to the new level, depleting all
ETH reserves in the LP’s position and leaving him only with USDC. The LP experiences an
adverse selection loss of $500K, compared to the scenario, in which he would just buy and
hold his initial portfolio of ETH and USDC, without providing liquidity on a DEX.
Panel B shows that the LP could partially protect himself from adverse selection by
redistributing the same amount of capital on a wider price range. Thus, his position would
be less concentrated around the market price. Posting on a wider price range would reduce
LP’s losses to $300K, because average execution price for his ETH reserves would be higher,
compared to Panel A. In contrast, Panel C assumes that the LP continuously monitors the
market and is able to update his position even before the arbitrageur’s trade arrives. In this
scenario, the LP is able to fully avoid adverse selection loss and makes a profit of $500K. It
is optimal for him to set a narrower price range, i.e. make his position more concentrated,
in order to earn higher rewards.
Being able to immediately update is the first-best solution for any LP. However, updating
is costly and requires continuous monitoring. Therefore, we expect LPs to reposition more
30Cartea et al. (2023) also show theoretically that wider position ranges protect the value of LP’s assets.
However, they do not model explicitly the ability of LPs to update their positions and the role of gas fees,
i.e. cost of updating.
16

===== PAGE 18 =====

frequently when updating is relatively cheaper, i.e. on blockchain scaling solutions. In the
following, we refer to the position updating frequency of LPs as repositioning intensity. We
formalize our first hypothesis as follows:
Hypothesis 1. Compared to Ethereum, higher repositioning intensity on blockchain
scaling solutions leads to higher aggregate liquidity concentration around the current market
price.
Whereas we use repositioning intensity as our benchmark measure, it could be that
liquidity providers do not necessarily update their positions close to the new market price.
Specifically, repositioning intensity does not take into account whether liquidity positions
are centered around the market price or not. Further, a position might be centered around
the market price, but it could also have a wide price range, which should not necessarily
result in higher liquidity concentration. To address these issues, we also focus our analysis on
repositioning precision, which we define as the distribution of individual liquidity positions
around the market price.
Specifically, we expect repositioning precision to be higher on blockchain scaling solutions.
With lower gas fees and better protection from adverse selection, we expect LPs to make
their positions more concentrated around the market price, i.e. we expect them to re-
post on a narrow price range, with the mid-price of the range close to the current market
price. More concentrated individual positions allow LPs to maximize their rewards from
liquidity provision. Importantly, more concentrated individual positions should result in
higher aggregate liquidity concentration around the current market price. Based on these
predictions, we formalize our second hypothesis as follows:
Hypothesis 2. Compared to Ethereum, higher repositioning precision on blockchain
scaling solutions leads to higher aggregate liquidity concentration around the current market
price.
Higher liquidity concentration around the market price is important, because it affects
slippage. In this paper, we define slippage of a trade as the difference between the average
17

===== PAGE 19 =====

execution price and the observed pre-execution market price. 31 For a given TVL, higher
liquidity concentration around the market price should reduce the slippage of any trade. 32
In contrast, less concentrated aggregate liquidity should increase slippage for a given TVL.
Importantly, Arbitrum’s and Polygon’s TVL is significantly lower than Ethereum’s (see
Panel A of Table 1). Ethereum’s large TVL, which corresponds to overall market depth, is
still of first-order importance for slippage of large trades, relative to liquidity concentration.
Hence, we expect large trades to have overall lower slippage on Ethereum due to its higher
TVL. Based on these differences in observed TVL, slippage is only comparable for smaller
trades (up to $5K) between Ethereum and blockchain scaling solutions. 33 Therefore, we
formalize our third hypothesis as follows:
Hypothesis 3. Higher liquidity concentration on blockchain scaling solutions should
result in lower slippage for small trades (up to$5K), compared to Ethereum. For large
trades (above$5K), slippage should be lower on Ethereum due to its higher TVL.
4.2 Repositioning intensity and liquidity concentration
Liquidity concentration. We start by comparing aggregate liquidity concentration around
the market price across Ethereum and blockchain scaling solutions. Specifically, we define
liquidity concentration within x% of the market price, as the market depth within x% of
pmkt, divided by T V L. Market depth within x% of pmkt is computed as the dollar value of
the liquidity between pmkt
1+x% and pmkt · (1 + x%). Table 3 reports average levels of liquidity
concentration across Ethereum, Arbitrum and Polygon, separately for low-fee and high-fee
pools.
31See Section 5 as well as Appendix C and D for details of slippage computation on Uniswap v3.
32For pools with large TVL in the current price range, higher liquidity concentration might not have any
effect on slippage of a small trade. However, higher liquidity concentration is still beneficial for larger trades
that would otherwise exhaust liquidity in the current price range.
33Panel B of Table 1 shows that the 75th percentile of trades on both Arbitrum and Polygon never exceeds
$5K, with average trade sizes of $2K-$4K.
18

===== PAGE 20 =====

[Insert Table 3 approximately here]
Column (1) reports average levels of liquidity concentration within 1% of the market price.
Columns (2) and (3) report corresponding statistics for liquidity concentration within 2% and
10% of the market price, respectively. Liquidity concentration mechanically increases with
the percentage band, i.e. market depth as percentage of TVL within 10% of the market price
is by construction higher than within 1% of the market price. More surprisingly, only around
24%-42% of all liquidity is concentrated within 10% for all pools. Hence, around two thirds of
TVL are further away than 10% from the market price across all pools. Consistent with our
expectations, we find strong evidence for higher liquidity concentration on blockchain scaling
solutions across all percentage bands, compared to Ethereum. We observe the differences
between average liquidity concentration on Arbitrum and Ethereum, ∆Arb − Eth, of 0.93%-
5.36%. The corresponding numbers for differences between Polygon and Ethereum, ∆ P ol−
Eth, are 1.18%-14.54%. T-statistics of the two-tailed t-test with the null-hypothesis of
difference equaling zero all exceed 100, i.e. all differences are statistically significant at the
1% level.
Figure 4 further illustrates the distribution of aggregate liquidity around the market price
for ETH/USDC 0.05% pool, separately for Ethereum, Arbitrum and Polygon. Specifically,
we use hourly snapshots to calculate average liquidity within each price range, scaled by
TVL (in %), over our sample period January 1, 2022 - June 30, 2023. Consistent with our
findings in Table 3, we observe higher liquidity concentration around the market price for
Arbitrum and Polygon, relative to Ethereum, i.e. liquidity distribution is more ”peaked” for
blockchain scaling solutions.
[Insert Figure 4 approximately here]
Liquidity provision and repositioning intensity. We further examine differences
in liquidity provision and repositioning intensity across Ethereum and blockchain scaling
solutions in Table 4. For all our analyses of liquidity provision, we filter out liquidity mints
19

===== PAGE 21 =====

and burns, for which the mid price of their range, computed as √plower · pupper, lies further
than 20% away from the market price. We treat these mints and burns as outliers and
exclude them from our analysis.34 We further exclude so-called “just-in-time” (JIT) liquidity
positions, which are used to provide “flash” liquidity within the same block to large trades
on Ethereum towards the end of our sample. 35 JIT positions represent around 27% of our
sample on Ethereum and less than 2.5% on Arbitrum and Polygon. We exclude them, since
this “flash” liquidity does not affect TVL and thus, liquidity concentration, which is our
main variable of interest. Further, JIT liquidity provision only benefits a few large traders
on Ethereum, and is generally not used to provide liquidity for small trades.
[Insert Table 4 approximately here]
We report the average daily number of mints for each chain in column (1) and the average
daily number of burns in column (4). Compared to Ethereum, we observe significantly more
frequent minting and burning of liquidity on Arbitrum and Polygon for ETH/USDC 0.05%
pool. A mint on Arbitrum (Polygon) takes place on average every 4.57 (2.63) minutes and
a burn every 6.05 (3.88) minutes, as compared to Ethereum’s 17.73 and 23.40 minutes,
respectively (see columns 2 and 5). However, the average daily minted value on Arbitrum
(Polygon) of around $11.75M ( $2.95M) is significantly lower than $41.19M minted daily
on Ethereum (column 3). Average daily burned values on Arbitrum and Polygon are of
approximately the same magnitude as daily minted values, and also significantly lower than
Ethereum’s $39.9M (column 6).
For ETH/USDC 0.3%, the daily number of mints is approximately the same across
Ethereum and blockchain scaling solutions, with a mint occurring every 20 minutes on each
34These positions represent around 13% of our overall sample. Our main findings continue to hold irre-
spective of the cutoff that we use to filter out outliers (for example, 10% or 30% away from the current
price). Minting and burning with the mid price far away from the current market price could potentially be
used by “wash LPs”, who aim to artificially increase TVL in the pool for improving its overall statistics.
35Lehar et al. (2022) also exclude JIT positions from their analysis. JIT positions involve minting liquidity
just before the large trade and subsequently burning the position, all within the same block.
20

===== PAGE 22 =====

of the chains. The daily minted value is much lower on Arbitrum and Polygon, which is
consistent with our prior findings of overall lower TVL for high-fee pools on blockchain
scaling solutions. Consequently, the daily burned value is also lower for high-fee pools on
Arbitrum and Polygon. These findings further support predictions of Lehar et al. (2022)
that all liquidity mostly consolidates in the low-fee pool in presence of low gas fees.
More frequent minting and burning liquidity on blockchain scaling solutions, especially
for the low-fee pool, suggests more intense liquidity repositioning. We next measure reposi-
tioning intensity, Intensity , more explicitly. Specifically, we define repositioning as a burn,
followed by a mint, in the same pool by the same liquidity provider within next five minutes.
In the following, we refer to mints, associated with repositioning, as ”repositioning mints”.
We then compute repositioning intensity as the dollar value of repositioning mints over a
5-minute interval, divided by the total dollar value minted over the same interval:
Intensity = RepositioningM inted$
T otalM inted$
, (1)
Intensity can take values between 0 and 1, with higher values associated with more
intense repositioning. We use five minutes as our benchmark time interval for computing
intensity, because it represents the average time between all mints and burns in our sample.
However, we also check that all our results are robust if we use the median time of one
minute between all mints and burns in our sample instead.
Column (7) of Table 4 presents the average 5-minute repositioning intensity (in %) across
Ethereum, Arbitrum and Polygon. For ETH/USDC 0.05%, the repositioning intensity on
Arbitrum (Polygon) is 40.64% (35.90%), which is more than double as high, compared to
Ethereum’s 15.89%. For ETH/USDC 0.3% we observe overall lower levels of intensity across
all three chains, as compared to the low-fee ETH/USDC 0.05% pool. Indeed, high-fee pools
are mostly used by more passive liquidity providers (LPs), consistent with prior findings
21

===== PAGE 23 =====

of Lehar et al. (2022). Importantly, Intensity on both Arbitrum and Polygon of 17.10%-
24.78% is still two to three times higher for the high-fee pool, relative to Ethereum’s 7.29%.
Overall, as expected, we observe significantly more repositioning taking place on blockchain
scaling solutions, driven by higher speed of transaction processing and lower gas fees.
Instrumental variable (IV) regressions. So far, we find that both liquidity con-
centration and repositioning intensity is significantly higher on blockchain scaling solutions,
relative to Ethereum. In this section, we would like to explicitly test our Hypothesis 1, show-
ing the causal relation between repositioning intensity and liquidity concentration on DEXs.
The straightforward approach to test this association is by regressing liquidity concentration
on repositioning intensity and other variables, controlling for market conditions. However,
the choice of an LP to update their position, i.e. burn and subsequently mint at a new price
range, is potentially endogenous, and can in itself depend on the current liquidity concentra-
tion in the pool. Hence, the slope coefficient on repositioning intensity from standard OLS
estimation would represent a biased estimate of its causal effect on liquidity concentration.
To identify the causal effect of repositioning intensity, we use the launch of Uniswap v3
on Arbitrum and Polygon as our instrument for an exogenous increase in updating frequency
of LPs. For any instrument to be valid, it has to satisfy two criteria. First, the instrument
must be correlated with the endogenous explanatory variable, i.e. it should induce change
in the explanatory variable. Second, it must satisfy the exclusion restriction, i.e. it should
not be correlated with the error term in the explanatory equation. The first condition holds,
because we indeed observe more frequent repositioning by LPs on blockchain scaling solutions
as a result of much lower gas fees (see Table 4). For exclusion restriction to hold, Uniswap’s
launch on blockchain scaling solutions should not affect liquidity concentration other than
through its effect on repositioning intensity. We argue that such correlation with the error
term is rather unlikely, because it would mean that Uniswap v3 chose its entry date on
Arbitrum (Polygon) strategically and was able to accurately predict a market-wide increase
22

===== PAGE 24 =====

in liquidity concentration. 36 Our setup is similar to Hendershott et al. (2011), who use the
introduction of NYSE Autoquote as an instrument for an exogenous increase in algorithmic
trading, and investigate its causal effect on liquidity.
To test the causal relation between repositioning intensity and liquidity concentration,
we next run instrumental variable regressions. We first estimate the following first-stage
regression, separately for each pool:
Intensity t = α + β1Arbitrum/P olygont +
+ β2V olumet + β3V olatilityt + β4|Return|t
+ HourF E+ DayF E+ εi,t,
where Arbitrum (P olygon) takes value of 1 for Arbitrum (Polygon) pool, and equals
zero for the corresponding Ethereum pool. Intensity and |Return| are measured over 5-
minute intervals. V olumeis the volume over previous 24 hours and V olatilityis the realized
volatility over previous 24 hours, both measured at the end of each 5-minute interval. All
regressions include hour- and day-fixed effects and allow standard errors to cluster at the
day level.
[Insert Table 5 approximately here]
Panel A of Table 5 reports the results for ETH/USDC 0.05%. The coefficient of 0.24 on
Arbitrum in Model (1) implies that repositioning intensity is 24% higher on Arbitrum for
this pool, relative to Ethereum. This coefficient is consistent with our previous statistics on
∆Arb−Eth from Table 4. We find that repositioning intensity on Polygon is also significantly
higher by 20%, relative to Ethereum (Model 3). We next include both Arbitrum and Polygon
pools in one regression. In Model (5), we define BlockScaling as an indicator variable that
36We also discuss potential alternative explanations of our findings in Section 6.
23

===== PAGE 25 =====

takes value of 1 for Arbitrum and Polygon pools, and zero for the Ethereum pool, used as a
benchmark. On average, we observe 21% higher repositioning intensity on blockchain scaling
solutions, relative to Ethereum.
Models (2), (4) and (6) report corresponding results for the second-stage regression:
Conc t = α + β1Intensity t +
+ β2V olumet + β3V olatilityt + β4|Return|t
+ HourF E+ DayF E+ εi,t,
Liquidity concentration, Conc, is measured within 2% of the current market price at the
end of each 5-minute interval. The set of instruments consists of all explanatory variables,
except that we use Arbitrum in place of Intensity in Model (2). In Models (4) and (6),
we use P olygonand BlockScaling in place of Intensity , respectively. Overall, Models (2),
(4) and (6) show that an increase in repositioning intensity significantly increases liquidity
concentration within 2% of the market price. The IV estimates of 0.09-0.11 on Intensity
variable mean that a 1% increase in Intensity increases liquidity concentration by around
10% for ETH/USDC 0.05% pool. The average standard deviation for Intensity is 0.4384
for this pool, such that a one-standard deviation change in Intensity is associated with a
0.4384 · 0.10 = 0 .0438 or 4.38% change in liquidity concentration. This value is economi-
cally significant, because it represents a 43% increase from the mean liquidity concentration
(within 2% of the market price) of 10.16% on Ethereum.
We also observe a significant effect of repositioning intensity on liquidity concentration
for the high-fee pool in Panel B, with IV estimates on Intensity of 0.08 for Arbitrum and
0.22 for Polygon. Table 4 shows that an increase in the repositioning intensity is higher on
Polygon for this pool, hence we observe a stronger effect, relative to Arbitrum.
To analyze which subset of LPs are actively engaging in repositioning, we next split LPs
24

===== PAGE 26 =====

by their aggregate minted and burned dollar value in each pool. In other words, for each
LP, we sum up their total minted and burned liquidity (in $) over our entire sample period,
separately for each chain and each pool. We then define large LPs as those in the top quartile
of our sample distribution, i.e. those with the highest dollar value minted and burned. We
replicate our previous analysis from Table 5 for a subset of large LPs. Unsurprisingly, they
are practically identical to our benchmark findings in Table 5 (see Table IA1 in the Internet
Appendix). Overall, these findings suggest that repositioning is indeed largely done by the
largest (professional) liquidity providers on each chain.
We also replicate our analysis from Table 5 for four additional pairs: BTC/ETH 0.05%,
BTC/ETH 0.3%, UNI/ETH 0.3% and LINK/ETH%. We choose these pairs because they
are among few that are relatively actively traded across all three chains, mapping into twelve
additional pools. All of these pairs have ETH as their quote token, and are therefore more
volatile relative to our benchmark ETH/USDC pair. Table IA2 in the Internet Appendix
presents the results of pooled regressions across all four pairs. Overall, all our previous
findings for our benchmark pair, ETH/USDC, continue to hold. On average, we observe
15% higher repositioning intensity on blockchain scaling solutions, relative to Ethereum.
Further, an increase in repositioning intensity significantly increases liquidity concentration
by around 29%.
Robustness checks. Table 6 presents robustness checks of our main findings. Panel A
presents results for the low-fee pool, and Panel B for the high-fee pool. Models (1) and (2)
report results of the second-stage IV regressions with BlockScaling as an instrument for the
low-fee pool (similar to our benchmark Model 6 in Table 5), using liquidity concentration
within 1% and within 10% of the current market price as the dependent variable, respectively.
We observe that the effect of repositioning intensity on liquidity concentration increases with
the percentage band, i.e. it affects liquidity concentration within 10% (2%) to a larger extent
than within 2% (1%). This effect is likely due to more repositioning taking place within 10%
(2%) of the market price, as opposed to repositioning within 2% (1%).
25

===== PAGE 27 =====

[Insert Table 6 approximately here]
Model (3) replicates our analysis from benchmark Model (6) in Table 5, using an alter-
native measure for repositioning intensity, IntensF req, defined as the ratio of the number
of repositioning mints to the total number of mints within a 5-minute interval. The IV esti-
mate on IntensF reqof 0.24 for the low-fee pool is even higher, compared to the benchmark
estimate of 0.11 from Panel A of Table 5. Model (4) uses another alternative measure of
Intensity , based on the 1-minute repositioning mints, which is the median time between all
mints and burns in our sample. In this analysis, we classify repositioning mints as those
that are preceded by burns of the same LP within the previous minute. The IV estimate
of 0.16 is of comparable economic magnitude to our benchmark estimate. In Model (5), we
use aggregation, based on 10-minute intervals instead of 5-minute intervals. The results are
practically identical to our benchmark estimate. We also observe similar patterns for all
robustness tests for the high-fee pool in Panel B.
To sum up, we find strong empirical evidence for our Hypothesis 1. Our instrumental
variable regressions show that higher repositioning intensity on blockchain scaling solutions
indeed leads to higher aggregate liquidity concentration around the current market price,
both for the low-fee and the high-fee pools.
4.3 Repositioning precision and liquidity concentration
Repositioning precision. We next test our Hypothesis 2 about the causal link of reposi-
tioning precision and aggregate liquidity concentration around the current market price. We
use three measures for repositioning precision: position gap, position length and position
precision. Our first measure is position gap, Gap, computed as
 pmid
pmkt
− 1
, where pmid is the
mid price of the position. For each position, posted on the range [ plower, pupper], we compute
pmid as √plower · pupper. The lower the position gap, the closer the mid price of minted posi-
tions to the market price. Therefore, Gap is inversely related to repositioning precision. We
26

===== PAGE 28 =====

report the average position gap (in %) across all repositioning mints in Column (1) of
Table 7.
[Insert Table 7 approximately here]
For ETH/USDC 0.05%, we observe the average position gap of 1.86% on Ethereum, i.e.
liquidity providers re-position their mints on average 1.86% away from the market price.
Consistent with our prior expectations, we find that the average position gap on blockchain
scaling solutions is significantly lower by 0.8%-1%, which represents an improvement in
repositioning precision of around 50%. For the high-fee pool, the average position gap on
Ethereum is higher, 3.41%, because liquidity providers do not reposition as often for this pool,
compared to the low-fee pool. However, we also observe significant precision improvement
on blockchain scaling solutions for this pool by around one third (i.e. by 1%-1.3%).
Our second measure of repositioning precision is position length, Length, computed as
|pupper−plower |
pmid
. The shorter the position length, the narrower the position is. Similar to Gap,
it is inversely related to repositioning precision. We report the average position length (in %)
across all repositioning mints in Column (2) of Table 7. For the low-fee pool, we observe that
positions are significantly narrower by 7.38% on Arbitrum and 5.16% on Polygon, relative
to the average value of around 18% on Ethereum. For the high-fee pool, positions are
overall substantially wider on Ethereum, in the range of 30%. This result is consistent with
more passive liquidity providers (with lower repositioning intensity) posting wider ranges
on high-fee pools to protect themselves from adverse selection. Importantly, we observe
substantially narrower positions in this pool on blockchain scaling solutions by around 14%.
This substantial reduction in position length for the high-fee pool is due to lower gas fees
on Arbitrum and Polygon. With low gas fees, it is cheaper, even for relatively more passive
(i.e. retail) liquidity providers, to update their positions, protecting themselves from adverse
selection.
The previous two measures look separately at the mid price of the position range and
on its length. Our third measure, position precision, P recision, combines the previous
27

===== PAGE 29 =====

two to address a potential criticism that positions with lower gaps could potentially be
wider, or, alternatively, narrower positions could be posted further away from the market
price. We compute P recisionas 1
Gap·Length and further scale it to lie in the range [0,1] as
1 − 1.0001
−1
Gap·Length . P recisionhas the lowest possible value of 0 and the highest possible
value of 1, or 100%. As for other measures, we compute the average precision across all
repositioning mints.
Column (3) of Table 7 shows that position precision is indeed significantly higher on
blockchain scaling solutions, relative to Ethereum. For ETH/USDC 0.05%, P recisionis
higher by 18%-20%, relative to the average value of 51% on Ethereum. As expected, position
precision is generally lower for the high-fee pool with more passive liquidity providers, around
20% on Ethereum. Importantly, it almost doubles on blockchain scaling solutions, increasing
by 17% on Arbitrum and by 22% on Polygon.
Overall, our univariate results confirm that liquidity providers re-position on Arbitrum
and Polygon not only closer to the market price, but also at significantly narrower ranges.
Thus, lower gas fees result in both higher repositioning intensity and higher repositioning
precision around the market price.
Instrumental variable (IV) regressions. We next test the causal relation between
repositioning precision and liquidity concentration. Similar to repositioning intensity, repo-
sitioning precision is endogenous. To address this issue, we use the launch of Uniswap v3
on blockchain sclaing solutions as our instrument for an exogenous increase in repositioning
precision. Since LPs are able to reposition more frequently on Arbitrum and Polygon, they
are better able to protect themselves from adverse selection. Hence, for the same amount
of capital deposited, LPs can maximize their rewards from liquidity provision by improving
the precision of their positions, i.e. minting positions that are more concentrated around
the market price. Indeed, our findings from Table 7 show that repositioning precision is
significantly higher on both Arbitrum and Polygon, relative to Ethereum.
We re-estimate our previous instrumental variables regressions, with Blockscaling now
28

===== PAGE 30 =====

used as an instrument for repositioning precision. Table 8 reports results for instrumental
variable regressions, separately for three measures of repositioning precision. 37
[Insert Table 8 approximately here]
Models (1) and (2) show results with position gap as a measure of repositioning preci-
sion. Model (1) reports results of the first-stage IV regression, with Gap as the dependent
variable and Blockscaling as the main explanatory variable. Consistent with previous find-
ings in Table 7, we observe significantly lower position gaps on blockchain scaling solutions,
relative to Ethereum. Model (2) shows results of the second-stage IV regressions, with liq-
uidity concentration within 2% of the market price as the dependent variable. 38 Consistent
with Hypothesis 2, we find that higher position gaps significantly reduce liquidity concen-
tration around the current market price. The average standard deviation for Gap is 0.023
for ETH/USDC 0.05%. Therefore, the IV estimate of -4.15 means that a one-standard de-
viation increase in Gap is associated with a 0 .023 · −4.15 = −0.0954 or 9.54% decrease in
liquidity concentration. As expected, we also observe a significant negative effect of Length
(Models 3 and 4) and a significant positive effect of P recision(Models 5 and 6) on liquidity
concentration for both pools.
We also replicate our analysis from Table 8 for four additional pairs: BTC/ETH 0.05%,
BTC/ETH 0.3%, UNI/ETH 0.3% and LINK/ETH%. Table IA4 in the Internet Appendix
presents the results of pooled regressions across all four pairs. Consistent with our benchmark
results, we find a significant negative effect ofGap and Length and a significant positive effect
of P recisionon liquidity concentration within 2% of the market price.
Consistent with our Hypotheses 1 and 2, our results in this section show that both repo-
sitioning intensity and precision increase liquidity concentration around the market price.
As both these variables are potentially endogenous, we use the launch of Uniswap v3 on
37Table IA3 in the Internet Appendix reports results separately for Arbitrum and Polygon. To conserve
space, we only present combined results for Blockscaling in Table 8.
38All our results also hold if we use liquidity concentration within 1% or 10% as the dependent variable.
29

===== PAGE 31 =====

Arbitrum and Polygon as our instruments to identify the causal effect of repositioning in-
tensity and precision on liquidity concentration. An increase in liquidity concentration is
important because it reduces slippage, for a given TVL. In the next section, we explicitly
compare slippage for trades of different sizes on Ethereum and blockchain scaling solutions.
5 Slippage: Ethereum vs blockchain scaling solutions
In this paper, we define slippage of a trade as the difference between the average execution
price, pavg = ∆y
∆x and the pre-execution pool price, pmkt:
Slippage =

pavg
pmkt
− 1

In other words, slippage shows by how much the execution price is worse than the previ-
ously displayed market price.39 Slippage is greater for larger trades and, as in Kyle (1985), is
inversely related to market depth. Appendix C discusses mechanics of trade execution and
derivations of average execution prices on Uniswap v3. Appendix D provides a numerical
example of slippage computation on DEXs.
We compute slippage, Slippage , for hypothetical trades of sizes [ $100, $500, $1K, $5K,
$10K, $50K, $100K] at the end of each 5-minute interval over our sample period (January
1, 2022 - June 30, 2023). Panel A of Table 9 presents summary statistics for Slippage (in
bp), separately for each chain.
[Insert Table 9 approximately here]
Given Ethereum’s overall larger TVL, it is not surprising that its average slippage of 0.3
bp for the low-fee pool is significantly lower than Arbitrum’s 8.8 bp and Polygon’s 4.25 bp.
39The term “slippage” on Uniswap is defined more broadly as the percentage difference between the quoted
price at the time of submitting the transaction and the actual execution price. For instance, a sandwich
attack could also cause slippage. However, our definition abstracts from “sandwich attacks”, assuming that
nothing happens between submission and execution, and refers to the difference of the average execution
price relative to the market price.
30

===== PAGE 32 =====

The median slippage of 0.60-0.73 bp on blockchain sclaing solutions is also higher, compared
to Ethereum’s 0.05 bp. As expected, average and median slippage values are higher for the
high-fee pool across all chains, due to its lower TVL. However, these statistics represent the
average across both small hypothetical trades of $100, $500, etc. and large hypothetical
trades of up to $100K. As Arbitrum and Polygon are mostly used by smaller traders, the
main focus of our analysis will be the comparison of slippage for small trades across Ethereum
and scaling solutions.
Before conditioning on trade size, we first confirm our findings from Panel A in a multi-
variate setup. Specifically, we estimate following OLS regressions:
Slippage i,t = α + β1BlockScaling i,t + β2Size i,t +
+ β3Buy i,t + β4V olumei,t + β5V olatilityi,t + β6|Return|i,t
+ HourF E+ DayF E+ εi,t.
The dependent variable, Slippage , shows the slippage for a trade of a given size for
pool i at the end of each 5-minute interval t (from the end-of-minute snapshot of liquidity
distribution). As before, BlockScaling , equals 1 for transactions on Arbitrum and Polygon,
and zero for Ethereum. Therefore, trades on Ethereum serve as a benchmark sample. The
vector of control variables includes trade size (in $K), Size ; the direction of the trade, Buy,
that equals 1 for purchases of token X and 0 for its sales; trading volume over previous 24
hours (in $M), V olume; realized volatility of ETH/USD over previous 24 hours, V olatility;
and absolute return of ETH/USD over the previous minute,|Return|. All regressions include
hour- and day-fixed effects and allow standard errors to cluster at the day level.
Panel B of Table 9 reports results for ETH/USDC 0.05% pool. The coefficient on
BlockScaling in Model (1) shows that slippage on blockchain scaling solutions is on av-
erage 1.41 bp higher, relative to the average slippage on Ethereum, after including control
31

===== PAGE 33 =====

variables. Unsurprisingly, slippage is increasing in the size of the trade. It does not differ
significantly between buys of token X and its sells. Further, slippage is decreasing in the
trading volume, implying that LPs deposit more liquidity if they observe higher volume over
previous 24 hours. This finding is consistent with our prior expectations, because LPs can
earn higher fees in periods of higher volume. Finally, slippage is increasing in both the
absolute return of ETH/USD over the previous five minutes and the realized volatility over
previous 24 hours. These findings are also in line with our expectations, suggesting that LPs
are more likely to withdraw liquidity from the pool during times of higher uncertainty. We
observe similar findings for the high-fee pool in Panel C, with slippage on average higher by
21.61 bp on blockchain scaling solutions,
We next test our Hypothesis 3, which predicts that higher liquidity concentration on
blockchain scaling solutions should result in lower slippage for small trades. Hence, we
condition our analysis on trade size, using the $1K and the $5K cutoffs to split trades into
small and large categories. We use these cutoffs, because the 75th percentile of trades on
both Arbitrum and Polygon never exceeds $5K, with average trade sizes of $2K-$4K (see
Panel B of Table 1).
In Model (2), we add a dummy variable Large that equals 1 for large trades that exceed
the $1K cutoff, and zero otherwise. We also add its interaction term with BlockScaling ,
BlockSc ·Large, that captures the relative difference in slippage of large trades on blockchain
scaling solutions, relative to Ethereum. The coefficient on BlockScaling now captures the
relative difference in slippage of small trades between Ethereum and blockchain scaling so-
lutions, and is of main interest in our analysis. As Large is mechanically related to Size ,
we omit Size from the vector of our control variables in Model (2).
We observe a positive and significant coefficient on Large in Model (2), suggesting that
large trades on Ethereum (i.e. those in excess of $1K) have on average 0.51 bp higher slippage
in the low-fee pool, compared to small trades. Importantly, we observe coefficients of different
signs on BlockScaling and BlockSc · Large. The negative coefficient on BlockScaling
32

===== PAGE 34 =====

shows that slippage of small trades (less than $1K) on scaling solutions is by 4.6 bp lower,
compared to small trades on Ethereum. The positive coefficient on the interaction term,
BlockSc · Large, shows that large trades on scaling solutions have a significantly higher
slippage of 10.53 bp, relative to large trades on Ethereum. Hence, the overall positive
coefficient on BlockScaling in Model (1) is driven by significantly higher slippage for larger
trades. Once we condition on trade size, we observe significantly lower slippage for small
trades on Arbitrum and Polygon.
Model (3) reports similar results, using $5K cutoff to split trades into small and large
categories. Models (4) and (5) report results separately for Arbitrum and Polygon, using$1K
cutoff. Overall, we observe economically stronger effect for Arbitrum, most likely because
Arbitrum pools are more liquid and have higher TVL, compared to Polygon (see Table 1).
All results also hold for the high-fee pool (Panel C), except that the coefficient on P olygon
is no longer significant. Indeed, ETH/USDC 0.3% pool on Polygon has the lowest trading
volume and TVL, such that we do not see any improvement in slippage for the high-fee pool
on Polygon. However, this is in line with theoretical predictions of Lehar et al. (2022) that
all liquidity should consolidate on the low-fee pool in presence of low gas fees.
Overall, our findings in this section strongly support our Hypothesis 3 that small trades
on scaling solutions have significantly lower slippage, relative to small trades on Ethereum.
Importantly, the total execution cost of small trades is further diminished by low gas fees
on Arbitrum and Polygon. In contrast, large trades have significantly lower slippage on
Ethereum due to its larger liquidity (higher TVL). Whereas gas fees are higher on Ethereum,
they are not of first-order importance for large trades, because they represent a fixed cost.
Thus, the effect of lower slippage outweighs the effect of higher gas fees for large trades on
Ethereum.
33

===== PAGE 35 =====

6 Alternative explanations
In this section, we address potential alternative explanations of our results. Indeed, it could
be that higher liquidity concentration on scaling solutions is driven not necessarily by higher
repositioning activity, but is an equilibrium outcome of liquidity provision. Hasbrouck et al.
(2023) model equilibrium liquidity provision for any price range on Uniswap v3. Specifically,
their Proposition 3.1 shows that equilibrium liquidity provision in a given interval increases
in the expected fee revenues and in the ex-fee return to liquidity providers from holding a
dynamic portfolio of two assets (e.g. ETH/USDC), Ri
P &L. The ex-fee return to liquidity
providers is driven not only by fluctuations in ETH/USDC price, but also by changes in
the quantity of ETH and USDC in a given price range, i.e. Ri
P &L is decreasing in adverse
selection.
Importantly, this equilibrium outcome is most likely different across Ethereum and scaling
solutions due to differences in the distribution of expected trade sizes and trading volume.
Fee levels (0.05% or 0.3%) are fixed on Uniswap v3 and remain the same across all three
chains. In absence of repositioning and assuming that arbitrageurs are not constrained in
their capital, the ex-fee return to LPs should be the same across all chains (for any given
amount of trading volume in a price interval). 40 However, the expected trading volume
and trade sizes differ across Ethereum and scaling solutions due to differences in underlying
security of chains, potential network effects etc. Given overall smaller expected trade sizes on
Arbitrum and Polygon, it might be indeed optimal for LPs to concentrate liquidity around
the current tick range on scaling solutions. Liquidity positions that lie further away from the
current tick range are less likely to be active (similar to limit orders that are less likely to
be executed if they are posted further away from the best bid/ask in the limit order book).
40Proposition 4.8 of Hasbrouck et al. (2023) shows that the ex-fee return to LPs is comparable to holding a
covered call position, i.e. holding ETH and shorting an ETH/USDC call option against that ETH position. If
the ETH/USDC price is following geometric Brownian motion, Black-Scholes formula for option valuation can
be applied. Assuming perfect arbitrage, volatility of ETH/USDC should be the same across all chains. The
remaining parameters, such as strike price, interest rate and option maturity are the same by construction.
Then, the ex-fee return to LPs should be equal across chains, holding trading volume constant.
34

===== PAGE 36 =====

In contrast, liquidity positions that are further away from the current tick range are more
likely to become active on Ethereum due to its larger expected trade sizes.
Whereas equilibrium liquidity distributions most likely differ across Ethereum and scaling
solutions, our aim is to show that repositioning activity indeed plays an important role for
aggregate liquidity concentration on DEXs. To identify the effect of repositioning activity
even further, we use an exogenous shock within Arbitrum chain, related to the airdrop of
Arbitrum token on March 23, 2023. Arguably, if a shock to repositioning activity occurs
within the same chain, all other underlying parameters that potentially affect the distribution
of the trade size (e.g., chain security), remain constant. In this case, changes in liquidity
concentration can indeed be mostly attributed to an increase in repositioning activity of
liquidity providers.
During the airdrop, around 1.162B of Arbitrum’s native token, ARB, was distributed
to users of the platform and another 113M to Decentralized Autonomous Organizations
(DAOs). Out of 113M, Uniswap was entitled to 4.3M, which makes it the third largest DAO
recipient after Treasure and GMX. 41 Uniswap, alongside other DEXs, incentivized their
liquidity pools on Arbitrum by distributing ARB tokens to LPs as “rewards”. Importantly,
Uniswap’s rewards to LPs were linked not only to the aggregate liquidity provided, but also
to the concentration of LP’s positions around the market price. The suggested formula for
computation of a reward score is increasing in the fees earned by each LP position, relative
to total fees earned by all LPs in the pool. 42. Hence, it incentivizes LPs to stay active and
re-position in the current price range to maximize their rewards.
Overall, we expect that an increase in repositioning intensity on Arbitrum after the
airdrop should have a more pronounced effect on aggregate liquidity concentration, relative to
the pre-airdrop sample. To test this prediction, we re-estimate our IV regressions, separately
before and after the airdrop, in Table 10.
41See https://docs.arbitrum.foundation/airdrop-eligibility-distribution for details of ARB distribution.
42See https://gov.uniswap.org/t/rfc-gamma-strategies-distribute-at-least-1-3-of-arb-airdrop-as-liquidity-
incentives/21345/2
35

===== PAGE 37 =====

[Insert Table 10 approximately here]
Models (1)-(3) report results for the pre-airdrop sample and Models (4)-(6) for the post-
airdrop sample, using Arbitrum as our instrument variable. As expected, we observe a
significant increase in repositioning intensity on Arbitrum after the airdrop. Before the
airdrop, repositioning intensity for the low-fee pool on Arbitrum is 22% higher, relative to
Ethereum (Model 1 of Panel A). After the Airdrop, this difference increases to 35% (Model
4). Importantly, the effect of repositioning intensity on aggregate liquidity concentration
increases from 4% before the airdrop to around 29% afterwards (Models 2 and 5). We observe
an even stronger increase in the effect of repositioning precision on liquidity concentration,
from 5% before the airdrop to 68% afterwards. 43 All our findings also hold for the high-fee
pool (Panel B).
To sum up, whereas we cannot possibly rule out differences in equilibrium liquidity
distributions across Ethereum and blockchain scaling solutions, an exogenous shock to repo-
sitioning activity within Arbitrum helps us further identify the causal effect of repositioning
activity on aggregate liquidity concentration on DEXs.
7 Conclusions
Liquidity providers (LPs) on decentralized exchanges (DEXs) can protect themselves from
adverse selection by either setting a wide price range for their position or by updating it more
frequently, in response to changes in the market price. However, updating is costly, because
every repositioning from an LP requires the payment of a fixed cost (a gas fee). Blockchain
scaling solutions, such as Arbitrum and Polygon, allow for more frequent updating by LPs
due to their lower gas fees. With more frequent updating, LPs are better able to track the
market price and protect themselves from adverse selection. Thus, for the same amount of
43To conserve space, we do not report first-stage IV regressions for repositioning precision, but we confirm
that it increases significantly after the airdrop (available upon request).
36

===== PAGE 38 =====

capital deposited in the pool, they can maximize their rewards by making their positions
more concentrated around the market price. In this paper, we use the launch of Uniswap v3
on Arbitrum and Polygon as our instrument to show that higher repositioning intensity and
precision of LPs leads to higher aggregate liquidity concentration around the market price.
Higher liquidity concentration around the market price is important, because it reduces
slippage, especially for small trades. Indeed, we find that slippage of small trades (up
to $5K) is significantly smaller on blockchain scaling solutions, relative to the incumbent
Ethereum. Thus, liquidity pools on scaling solutions provide better execution terms for small
(retail) traders. However, these benefits come at a cost of lower security on scaling solutions,
relative to Ethereum. Due to its higher security, Ethereum attracts larger liquidity providers,
resulting in higher TVL. Consequently, slippage of large trades is lower on Ethereum as its
liquidity pools are deeper. High gas fees on Ethereum are of lower importance for large
traders due to their fixed-cost nature. Thus, similar to a separating equilibrium, we observe
that large traders and liquidity providers are attracted to Ethereum, whereas small (e.g.
retail) traders and liquidity providers are better off using blockchain scaling solutions.
37

===== PAGE 39 =====

References
Adams, H., Zinsmeister, N., Salem, M., Keefer, R., & Robinson, D. (2021). Uniswap v3
whitepaper. Tech. rep., Uniswap, https://uniswap.org/whitepaper-v3.pdf.
Aoyagi, J. (2020). Liquidity provision by automated market makers. Working paper, Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology.
Aoyagi, J., & Ito, Y. (2021). Coexisting exchange platforms: Limit order books and auto-
mated market makers. Working paper, Hong Kong University of Science and Tech-
nology.
Aspris, A., Foley, S., Svec, J., & Wang, L. (2021). Decentralized exchanges: The “wild west”
of cryptocurrency trading. International Review of Financial Analysis, 77, 101845.
Barbon, A., & Ranaldo, A. (2021). On the quality of cryptocurrency markets: Centralized
versus decentralized exchanges. Working paper, University of St. Gallen.
Capponi, A., & Jia, R. (2021). The adoption of blockchain-based decentralized exchanges.
Working paper, Columbia University.
Cartea, ´A., Drissi, F., & Monga, M. (2023). Decentralised finance and automated market
making: Predictable loss and optimal liquidity provision. Working paper, Oxford-Man
Institute of Quantitative Finance.
Chemaya, N., & Liu, D. (2022). Estimating investor preferences for blockchain security.
Working paper, University of California, Santa Barbara.
Foley, S., O’Neill, P., & Putni¸ nˇ s, T. J. (2023). A better market design? Applying ’Automated
Market Makers’ to traditional finance markets. Working paper, University of New
South Wales.
Hasbrouck, J., Rivera, T. J., & Saleh, F. (2022). The need for fees at a DEX: How increases
in fees can increase DEX trading volume. Working paper, Wake Forest University.
Hasbrouck, J., Rivera, T. J., & Saleh, F. (2023). An economic model of a decentralized
exchange with concentrated liquidity. Working paper, Wake Forest University.
38

===== PAGE 40 =====

Heimbach, L., Schertenleib, E., & Wattenhofer, R. (2022). Risks and returns of Uniswap V3
liquidity providers. Working paper, ETH Z¨ urich.
Hendershott, T., Jones, C. M., & Menkveld, A. J. (2011). Does algorithmic trading improve
liquidity? Journal of Finance, 66 (1), 1–33.
Kyle, A. S. (1985). Continuous auctions and insider trading. Econometrica, 53, 1315–1335.
Lehar, A., & Parlour, C. A. (2021). Decentralized exchange: The Uniswap automated market
maker. Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Lehar, A., Parlour, C. A., & Zoican, M. (2022). Liquidity fragmentation on decentralized
exchanges. Working paper, Haas School of Business, UC Berkeley.
Park, A. (2023). The conceptual flaws of decentralized automated market making. Manage-
ment Science, 69 (11), 6731–6751.
39

===== PAGE 41 =====

Figures
Figure 1: Binance BTC/USDT limit order book snapshot. Bid side (in green) represents the
cumulative BTC quantity of buy limit orders, and ask side (in red) represents the cumulative BTC quantity
of sell limit orders. The displayed BTC market price in USDT (vertical line) is the mid price, which is the
average of the best bid price and the best ask price.
Source: Binance.
40

===== PAGE 42 =====

Figure 2: Monthly traded volume on CEXs and DEXs.Panel A of this figure shows monthly
traded volume on CEXs (in$) from May 2017 until April 2023, showing the market shares separately
for each exchange. Panel B shows monthly traded volume on DEXs (in $) from June 2020, after
the launch of Uniswap v2, until April 2023.
Panel A: CEXs volume
Panel B: DEXs volume
Source: The Block, https://www.theblock.co/data.
41

===== PAGE 43 =====

Figure 3: Protecting from adverse selection by LPs.Panel A shows a scenario when an LP’s position
is adversely selected by an arbitrageur. We assume that ETH price (in USDC) experiences a permanent
increase from 1,000 to 2,000. The arbitrageur’s buy trade moves the market price to the new level, depleting
all ETH reserves in the LP’s position and leaving him only with USDC. The LP experiences an adverse
selection loss of $500K, compared to the scenario, in which he would just hold his initial portfolio of ETH
and USDC. Panel B shows that the LP could partially protect himself from adverse selection by redistributing
the same amount of capital on a wider price range. Thus, his position would be less concentrated around the
market price. Posting on a wider price range would reduce LP’s losses to $300K, because average execution
price for his ETH reserves would be higher, compared to Panel A. In contrast, Panel C assumes that the
LP continuously monitors the market and is able to update his position even before the arbirtrageur’s trade
arrives. In this scenario, the LP is able to fully avoid adverse selection loss and makes a profit of $500K.
Panel A: LP is adversely selected
Panel B: Protecting by setting a wider initial price range
42

===== PAGE 44 =====

Panel C: Protecting by updating the position
43

===== PAGE 45 =====

Figure 4: Average range liquidity , scaled by TVL: ETH/USDC 0.05%.This figure shows average
liquidity within each price range, scaled by TVL, for ETH/USDC 0.05% pool, separately for Ethereum,
Arbitrum and Polygon. Averages for each price range are constructed from hourly liquidity snapshots over
our sample period January 1, 2022 - June 30, 2023. The dotted vertical line shows the average market price
over our sample period.
44

===== PAGE 46 =====

Tables
Table 1: Summary statistics: volume, TVL and trade size.Panel A of this table presents average
24-hour volume (in $M) and average total value locked (TVL) (in $M) on Uniswap v3 across Ethereum,
Arbitrum and Polygon for two liquidity pools: ETH/USDC 0.05% and ETH/USDC 0.3%. Panel B reports
summary statistics of trade sizes. Panel C reports the average daily numbers of trades, purchases and sales
as well as the average time (in seconds) between two trades (delta). Our sample period ranges from January
1, 2022 to June 30, 2023. Appendix E provides a detailed description of all variable definitions.
Panel A: V olume and TVL
Pool V olume 24h ( $M) TVL ( $M) V olume/TVL
ETH/USDC 0.05%
Ethereum 513.73 201.19 2.55
Arbitrum 51.93 18.04 2.88
Polygon 29.03 10.26 2.83
ETH/USDC 0.3%
Ethereum 57.83 176.59 0.33
Arbitrum 1.65 4.48 0.37
Polygon 0.95 1.89 0.50
Panel B: T rade size
Pool Mean ( $K) SD 25% 50% 75%
ETH/USDC 0.05%
Ethereum 72.19 255.61 0.82 4.55 42.67
Arbitrum 4.12 10.10 0.06 0.96 4.64
Polygon 2.42 5.09 0.07 0.77 2.86
ETH/USDC 0.3%
Ethereum 116.19 241.02 1.31 30.00 144.65
Arbitrum 2.95 6.76 0.08 1.34 3.33
Polygon 1.74 3.37 0.38 0.88 1.83
45

===== PAGE 47 =====

Panel C: T rade frequency
Pool Daily trades Daily buys Daily sells Delta (s)
ETH/USDC 0.05%
Ethereum 7130.90 3495.97 3634.93 12.14
Arbitrum 12668.05 6146.88 6521.17 6.83
Polygon 12048.61 5651.39 6397.23 7.18
ETH/USDC 0.3%
Ethereum 498.17 245.12 253.05 173.75
Arbitrum 560.95 285.41 275.53 154.31
Polygon 545.50 272.64 272.86 158.67
Table 2: Summary statistics: control variables. This table presents summary statistics for the
following control variables: the traded volume over the previous 24 hours, V olume(in $M); the realized
volatility of ETH/USD over the previous 24 hours,V olatility, (in %); and the 1-minute return of ETH/USD,
Return (in bp). V olatilityand Return are based on a single time series for ETH/USD from Binance, which
is independent from Uniswap v3. Appendix E provides a detailed description of all variable definitions. Our
sample period ranges from January 1, 2022 to June 30, 2023.
Mean SD 25% 50% 75%
Volume 24h ($M)
ETH/USDC 0.05%
Ethereum 513.73 338.53 277.40 466.48 644.16
Arbitrum 51.93 49.65 17.54 33.15 70.16
Polygon 29.03 18.28 16.50 25.52 37.34
ETH/USDC 0.3%
Ethereum 57.83 62.88 17.31 41.96 76.64
Arbitrum 1.65 1.46 0.63 1.08 2.21
Polygon 0.95 0.94 0.30 0.71 1.28
Volatility 24h (%) 3.53 1.87 2.31 3.16 4.26
Return 1min (bp) 0.00 10.53 -3.87 0.00 3.80
46

===== PAGE 48 =====

Table 3: Liquidity concentration. This table reports average levels of liquidity concentration across
Ethereum, Arbitrum and Polygon for two liquidity pools: ETH/USDC 0.05% and ETH/USDC 0.3%. We
define liquidity concentration within x% of the market price, as the ratio of market depth within x% of
pmkt, divided by T V L. Market depth within x% of pmkt is computed as the $ value of the liquidity between
pmkt
1+x% and pmkt · (1 +x%). Appendix E provides a detailed description of all variable definitions. Column (1)
reports average levels of liquidity concentration within 1% of the market price. Columns (2) and (3) report
corresponding statistics for liquidity concentration within 2% and 10% of the market price, respectively. We
also report the difference between averages on Arbitrum and Ethereum (∆Arb − Eth) as well as Polygon and
Ethereum (∆P ol− Eth). T-statistics of the two-tailed t-test with the null-hypothesis of differences equaling
zero exceed 100. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
Pool Liquidity concentration (%)
1% 2% 10%
ETH/USDC 0.05%
Ethereum 5.43 10.16 35.28
Arbitrum 6.35 11.85 39.64
∆Arb − Eth 0.93 *** 1.70 *** 4.36 ***
Polygon 6.61 12.45 42.44
∆P ol− Eth 1.18 *** 2.29 *** 7.16 ***
ETH/USDC 0.3%
Ethereum 2.80 5.53 24.20
Arbitrum 3.81 7.39 29.56
∆Arb − Eth 1.01 *** 1.85 *** 5.36 ***
Polygon 5.24 10.20 38.74
∆P ol− Eth 2.44 *** 4.67 *** 14.54 ***
47

===== PAGE 49 =====

Table 4: Liquidity provision and repositioning intensity .This table reports average levels of liq-
uidity provision across Ethereum, Arbitrum and Polygon for two liquidity pools: ETH/USDC 0.05% and
ETH/USDC 0.3%. We report the average daily number of mints (column 1); the average duration between
two mints (in minutes) (column 2); the average daily minted value (in $M) (column 3); the average daily
number of burns (column 4); the average duration between two burns (in minutes) (column 5); the average
daily burned value (in $M) (column 6); and the average repositioning intensity over 5-minute intervals (in
%) (column 7). We define repositioning as a burn followed by a mint in the same pool by the same liquidity
provider within next 5 minutes. We measure repositioning intensity as the value of repositioning mints (in
$) over a 5-minute interval divided by the total value minted (in $) over the same interval. Appendix E
provides a detailed description of all variable definitions. We also report the difference between averages on
Arbitrum and Ethereum (∆ Arb − Eth) as well as Polygon and Ethereum (∆ P ol− Eth). T-statistics of the
two-tailed t-test with the null-hypothesis of difference equaling zero are reported in parentheses.
Pool Mints Delta Minted Burns Delta Burned Intensity
(#/day) (min) ( $M/day) (#/day) (min) ( $M/day) (%)
ETH/USDC 0.05%
Ethereum 81.21 17.73 41.19 61.54 23.40 39.90 15.89
Arbitrum 315.27 4.57 11.75 237.83 6.05 11.60 40.64
∆Arb − Eth 234.06 -13.17 -29.44 176.29 -17.34 -28.31 24.75
(137.45) (-29.00) (106.40) (-28.19) (96.64)
Polygon 546.64 2.63 2.95 371.46 3.88 2.82 35.90
∆P ol− Eth 465.43 -15.10 -38.24 309.92 -19.52 -37.08 20.01
(246.81) (-40.04) (205.67) (-39.32) (84.01)
ETH/USDC 0.3%
Ethereum 74.18 19.41 6.53 32.65 44.10 5.42 7.29
Arbitrum 69.92 20.59 0.26 31.66 45.48 0.24 17.10
∆Arb − Eth -4.25 1.18 -6.27 -0.99 1.38 -5.18 9.81
(-4.69) (-26.33) (-2.45) (-22.76) (36.14)
Polygon 72.94 19.74 0.30 46.88 30.72 0.28 24.78
∆P ol− Eth -1.24 0.33 -6.23 14.22 -13.38 -5.14 17.49
(-1.67) (-26.16) (30.70) (-22.58) (60.39)
48

===== PAGE 50 =====

Table 5: Repositioning intensity and liquidity concentration: IV regressions.This table presents
results of instrumental variable regressions that test causal effect of repositioning intensity of LPs,Intensity ,
on aggregate liquidity concentration around the market price, Conc. Panel A reports results for the low-fee
pool (ETH/USDC 0.05%), and Panel B for the high-fee pool (ETH/USDC 0.3%). Arbitrum (P olygon)
takes value of 1 for Arbitrum (Polygon) pools, and zero for Ethereum pools. Model (1) reports the results
for the first-stage regression, with repositioning intensity of LPs, Intensity , as the dependent variable and
Arbitrum as the main explanatory variable, which is used as an instrument for the endogenous Intensity .
Model (2) reports results for the second-stage regression, with liquidity concentration within 2% of the market
price, Conc, as the dependent variable. We estimate liquidity concentration at the end of every 5-minute
interval and the repositioning intensity over every 5-minute interval. The set of instruments consists of all
explanatory variables, except that Intensity is replaced with Arbitrum. The table shows corresponding
results for Polygon pools in Models (3) and (4), with P olygonused as an instrument for the endogenous
Intensity . Models (5) and (6) use BlockScaling that takes value of 1 for both Arbitrum and Polygon pools,
and zero for the corresponding Ethereum pool, as an instrument. The vector of control variables consists
of V olume, V olatilityand |Return|. See Appendix E for a detailed description of variable definitions. All
regressions include hour- and day-fixed effects, with standard errors clustered at the day level. T-statistics
of the two-tailed t-test with the null-hypothesis of a coefficient equaling zero are reported in parentheses.
***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
Panel A: ETH/USDC 0.05%
Arbitrum Polygon BlockScaling
Int Conc Int Conc Int Conc
2% 2% 2%
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Arbitrum 0.24 ***
(35.55)
P olygon 0.20 ***
(33.60)
BlockScaling 0.21 ***
(43.78)
Intensity 0.09 *** 0.11 *** 0.11 ***
(59.67) (66.04) (69.65)
V olume 0.00 0.01 *** -0.01 *** 0.01 *** 0.01 *** 0.01 ***
(1.27) (48.33) (-3.42) (59.75) (3.85) (57.25)
V olatility -0.65 -1.52 *** 0.45 -1.57 *** -1.35 *** -1.41 ***
(-1.19) (-41.02) (1.02) (-48.61) (-2.88) (-51.38)
|Return| 23.82 *** -2.98 *** 18.11 *** -2.45 *** 22.45 *** -3.09 ***
(16.86) (-27.79) (17.13) (-29.57) (19.14) (-38.43)
Observations 114,817 114,817 148,416 148,416 221,268 221,268
HourF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
DateF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
49

===== PAGE 51 =====

Panel B: ETH/USDC 0.3%
Arbitrum Polygon BlockScaling
Int Conc Int Conc Int Conc
2% 2% 2%
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Arbitrum 0.12 ***
(12.57)
P olygon 0.16 ***
(28.67)
BlockScaling 0.13 ***
(22.40)
Intensity 0.08 *** 0.22 *** 0.15 ***
(29.03) (40.97) (43.08)
V olume -0.14 *** 0.06 *** -0.00 0.04 *** 0.01 0.07 ***
(-3.98) (42.50) (-0.19) (17.74) (0.53) (46.28)
V olatility 2.97 *** -1.22 *** 0.29 -1.08 *** 0.32 -1.53 ***
(4.86) (-39.04) (0.70) (-15.60) (0.70) (-35.22)
|Return| 9.15 *** -0.96 *** 17.87 *** -4.15 *** 17.49 *** -2.78 ***
(8.47) (-11.58) (12.54) (-18.77) (13.93) (-20.79)
Observations 53,145 53,145 57,472 57,472 81,810 81,810
HourF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
DateF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
50

===== PAGE 52 =====

Table 6: Repositioning intensity and liquidity concentration: robustness checks. This table
presents robustness checks for our instrumental variable regressions. Panel A reports results for the low-fee
pool (ETH/USDC 0.05%), and Panel B for the high-fee pool (ETH/USDC 0.3%). All models report results
of the second-stage IV regressions with BlockScaling as an instrument for Intensity , similar to Model (6) in
Table 5. BlockScaling takes value of 1 for both Arbitrum and Polygon pools, and zero for the corresponding
Ethereum pool. Models (1) and (2) use liquidity concentration within 1% and within 10% of the current
market price as the dependent variable, respectively. Model (3) uses an alternative measure for repositioning
intensity, IntensF req, defined as the ratio of the number of repositioning mints to the total number of
mints within a 5-minute interval. Model (4) uses an alternative measure of Intensity , based on the 1-minute
repositioning mints. In this analysis, we classify repositioning mints as those that are preceded by burns of
the same LP within the previous minute. Model (5) uses 10-minute intervals for estimation of repositioning
intensity and liquidity concentration, instead of 5-minute intervals. The vector of control variables consists
of V olume, V olatilityand |Return|. See Appendix E for a detailed description of variable definitions. All
regressions include hour- and day-fixed effects, with standard errors clustered at the day level. T-statistics
of the two-tailed t-test with the null-hypothesis of a coefficient equaling zero are reported in parentheses.
***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
Panel A: ETH/USDC 0.05%
Conc Conc IntFreq Repostn Aggr
1% 10% 1-min 10-min
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Intensity 0.06 *** 0.34 *** 0.16 *** 0.10 ***
(69.57) (80.57) (71.87) (63.62)
IntensF req 0.24 ***
(31.90)
V olume 0.00 *** 0.02 *** 0.01 *** 0.01 *** 0.01 ***
(57.69) (47.80) (33.37) (69.84) (53.59)
V olatility -0.84 *** -2.82 *** -1.35 *** -1.44 *** -1.39 ***
(-52.21) (-36.63) (-26.90) (-51.67) (-45.54)
|Return| -1.85 *** -8.68 *** -6.39 *** -3.71 *** -2.01 ***
(-39.32) (-37.14) (-27.97) (-38.80) (-32.58)
Observations 221,268 221,268 214,875 221,267 149,871
HourF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
DateF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
51

===== PAGE 53 =====

Panel B: ETH/USDC 0.3%
Conc Conc IntFreq Repostn Aggr
1% 10% 1-min 10-min
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Intensity 0.08 *** 0.42 *** 0.21 *** 0.15 ***
(42.66) (42.56) (44.66) (40.52)
IntensF req 0.17 ***
(37.48)
V olume 0.04 *** 0.21 *** 0.07 *** 0.07 *** 0.07 ***
(43.93) (49.60) (40.42) (54.16) (44.07)
V olatility -0.80 *** -4.46 *** -1.52 *** -1.49 *** -1.56 ***
(-33.59) (-36.66) (-31.26) (-35.58) (-32.65)
|Return| -1.51 *** -7.55 *** -3.33 *** -3.59 *** -2.11 ***
(-20.74) (-20.20) (-20.62) (-21.11) (-20.42)
Observations 81,810 81,810 81,133 81,810 67,874
HourF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
DateF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
52

===== PAGE 54 =====

Table 7: Repositioning precision This table reports average levels of position gap (%), position length
(%) and position precision (%) across Ethereum, Arbitrum and Polygon for two liquidity pools: ETH/USDC
0.05% and ETH/USDC 0.3%. We define repositioning gap, Gap, as the average gap between the mid price
of repositioning mints, pmid, and pmkt, computed as
 pmid
pmkt
− 1
. pmid is computed as √plower · pupper. We
define a repositioning mint as a mint, preceded by a burn in the same pool by the same liquidity provider
within previous 5 minutes. Repositioning length, Length, is the average range length of repositioning mints,
computed as |pupper−plower |
pmid
. Repositioning precision, P recision, is the average precision of repositioning
mints, computed and scaled as 1 − 1.0001
−1
Gap·Length . Appendix E provides a detailed description of all
variable definitions. Column (1) reports average levels of repositioning gap. Columns (2) and (3) report
corresponding statistics for repositioning length and repositioning precision, respectively. We also report the
difference between averages on Arbitrum and Ethereum (∆ Arb − Eth) as well as Polygon and Ethereum
(∆P ol− Eth). T-statistics of the two-tailed t-test with the null-hypothesis of difference equaling zero are
reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.
Pool Gap (%) Length (%) Precision (%)
ETH/USDC 0.05%
Ethereum 1.86 18.07 50.77
Arbitrum 0.85 10.69 70.89
∆Arb − Eth -1.01 *** -7.38 *** 20.12 ***
(-49.01) (-63.20) (53.98)
Polygon 1.09 12.91 68.60
∆P ol− Eth -0.77 *** -5.16 *** 17.83 ***
(-32.70) (-46.43) (45.23)
ETH/USDC 0.3%
Ethereum 3.41 29.28 20.02
Arbitrum 2.09 15.04 36.63
∆Arb − Eth -1.32 *** -14.24 *** 16.61 ***
(-17.14) (-21.76) (20.50)
Polygon 2.44 15.11 42.12
∆P ol− Eth -0.97 *** -14.17 *** 22.10 ***
(-12.94) (-27.87) (28.70)
53

===== PAGE 55 =====

Table 8: Repositioning precision and liquidity concentration: IV regressions.This table presents
results of instrumental variable regressions that test causal effect of repositioning precision of LPs on liquidity
concentration around the market price. We use three measures of repositioning precision: Gap, Length and
P recision. See Appendix E for a detailed description of variable definitions. Panel A reports results for
the low-fee pool (ETH/USDC 0.05%), and Panel B for the high-fee pool (ETH/USDC 0.3%). Model (1)
reports the results of the first-stage IV regression with Gap as the dependent variable. Model (2) reports
the results of the second-stage regression with liquidity concentration within 2% as the dependent variable.
Blockscaling is used as an instrument for the endogenous repositioning precision (i.e. Gap). Models (3)
and (4) present corresponding results for Length as a measure of repositioning precision. Models (5) and (6)
present results for P recision. The vector of control variables consists of V olume, V olatilityand |Return|.
All regressions include hour- and day-fixed effects, with standard errors clustered at the day level. T-statistics
of the two-tailed t-test with the null-hypothesis of a coefficient equaling zero are reported in parentheses.
***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
Panel A: ETH/USDC 0.05%
Gap Conc Length Conc Precision Conc
2% 2% 2%
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
BlockScaling -0.01 *** -0.05 *** 0.12 ***
(-9.26) (-13.83) (11.85)
Gap -4.15 ***
(-15.82)
Length -0.47 ***
(-27.70)
P recision 0.18 ***
(23.28)
V olume -0.00 *** 0.00 *** -0.00 ** 0.01 *** 0.02 *** 0.00 ***
(-5.45) (7.53) (-2.56) (30.86) (3.76) (16.52)
V olatility 0.26 *** -0.46 *** 0.87 *** -1.13 *** -4.65 *** -0.69 ***
(6.02) (-4.15) (4.16) (-21.77) (-6.21) (-10.96)
|Return| -0.41 *** -2.28 *** -4.60 *** -2.84 *** 6.71 *** -1.77 ***
(-8.99) (-13.45) (-13.27) (-21.15) (7.66) (-16.04)
Observations 102,625 102,625 102,625 102,625 102,625 102,625
HourF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
DateF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
54

===== PAGE 56 =====

Panel B: ETH/USDC 0.3%
Gap Conc Length Conc Precision Conc
2% 2% 2%
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
BlockScaling -0.01 *** -0.11 *** 0.12 ***
(-5.01) (-13.11) (8.84)
Gap -3.05 ***
(-7.05)
Length -0.16 ***
(-17.55)
P recision 0.15 ***
(15.52)
V olume -0.01 *** 0.04 *** -0.04 ** 0.06 *** 0.15 *** 0.04 ***
(-3.31) (5.73) (-2.10) (23.71) (5.42) (11.82)
V olatility 0.27 *** -0.74 *** 1.36 *** -1.34 *** -5.42 *** -0.72 ***
(2.84) (-3.09) (3.13) (-17.31) (-6.55) (-6.48)
|Return| -0.25 ** -0.80 *** -3.53 *** -0.62 *** 7.60 *** -1.21 ***
(-2.58) (-2.74) (-6.67) (-5.88) (7.43) (-7.36)
Observations 15,173 15,174 15,173 15,174 15,173 15,174
HourF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
DateF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
55

===== PAGE 57 =====

Table 9: Slippage: summary statistics and multivariate analysis.Panel A of this table presents
summary statistics for slippage, Slippage (in bp), on Uniswap v3 across Ethereum, Arbitrum and Polygon
for two liquidity pools: ETH/USDC 0.05% and ETH/USDC 0.3%. We compute Slippage for hypothetical
trades of sizes [$100, $500, $1K, $5K, $10K, $50K, $100K] for every minute in our sample period (January 1,
2022 - June 30, 2023). Panels B and C present the results of OLS regressions with slippage, Slippage (in bp),
as the dependent variable. Model (1) reports the results for the total sample, with BlockScaling equal to
1 for hypothetical trades on Arbitrum and Polygon, and zero otherwise. Trades on Ethereum represent the
benchmark sample. Models (2) and (3) report results, conditioning on the trade size. Specifically, we define
Large equal to 1 if a trade exceeds $1K (Model 2) or $5K (Model 3), and zero otherwise. Models (4) and
(5) report results for the benchmark Model (2), separately for Arbitrum and Polygon. The vector of control
variables consists of Size , Buy, V olume, V olatility, |Return|. See Appendix E for a detailed description
of variable definitions. All regressions include hour- and date-fixed effects, with standard errors clustered
at the day level. T-statistics of the two-tailed t-test with the null-hypothesis of a coefficient equaling zero
are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.
Panel A: Summary statistics
Mean SD 25% 50% 75%
Slippage (bp)
ETH/USDC 0.05%
Ethereum 0.30 0.61 0.01 0.05 0.37
Arbitrum 8.80 27.81 0.07 0.60 4.25
Polygon 4.25 8.05 0.09 0.73 5.92
ETH/USDC 0.3%
Ethereum 0.55 0.90 0.01 0.11 0.85
Arbitrum 23.25 51.95 0.35 2.62 20.63
Polygon 34.24 62.18 0.72 5.40 38.23
56

===== PAGE 58 =====

Panel B: ETH/USDC 0.05%
BlockScaling Arbitrum Polygon
Total Large
> $1K
Large
> $5K
Large
> $1K
Large
> $1K
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
BlockScaling 1.41 *** -4.60 *** -4.32 ***
(3.18) (-9.10) (-8.65)
Arbitrum -6.41 ***
(-8.09)
P olygon -1.62 ***
(-8.73)
BlockSc · Large 10.53 *** 13.37 *** 14.37 *** 6.67 ***
(19.79) (19.79) (15.12) (42.59)
Large 0.51 *** 0.65 *** 0.51 *** 0.51 ***
(37.00) (37.00) (37.00) (37.00)
Size 0.19 ***
(20.63)
Buy -0.00 -0.00 -0.00 0.01 -0.01 ***
(-0.22) (-0.22) (-0.22) (0.27) (-3.42)
V olume -0.01 *** -0.01 *** -0.01 *** -0.01 *** -0.00 ***
(-9.06) (-9.06) (-9.06) (-8.02) (-9.61)
V olatility 0.86 *** 0.86 *** 0.86 *** 1.38 *** 0.41 ***
(8.96) (8.96) (8.96) (7.68) (9.33)
|Return| 0.48 *** 0.48 *** 0.48 *** 0.39 *** 0.33 ***
(9.26) (9.26) (9.26) (5.83) (10.60)
R2 0.28 0.20 0.24 0.24 0.36
Observations 6,603,702 6,603,702 6,603,702 4,402,468 4,402,468
HourF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
DateF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
57

===== PAGE 59 =====

Panel C: ETH/USDC 0.3%
BlockScaling Arbitrum Polygon
Total Large
> $1K
Large
> $5K
Large
> $1K
Large
> $1K
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
BlockScaling 21.61 *** -5.78 *** -4.48 ***
(31.41) (-8.00) (-6.29)
Arbitrum -9.74 ***
(-12.45)
P olygon -1.07
(-1.20)
BlockSc · Large 47.94 *** 60.89 *** 38.50 *** 57.38 ***
(50.21) (50.17) (29.78) (43.93)
Large 0.94 *** 1.19 *** 0.94 *** 0.94 ***
(68.44) (68.45) (68.44) (68.44)
Size 0.81 ***
(51.08)
Buy 0.18 * 0.18 * 0.18 * 0.29 *** -0.03
(1.68) (1.68) (1.68) (3.22) (-0.25)
V olume -0.12 *** -0.12 *** -0.12 *** -0.19 *** -0.03 **
(-9.32) (-9.32) (-9.32) (-12.40) (-2.09)
V olatility 2.11 *** 2.11 *** 2.11 *** 3.20 *** 1.27 ***
(10.90) (10.90) (10.90) (11.57) (4.50)
|Return| 1.00 *** 1.00 *** 1.00 *** 0.51 *** 0.98 ***
(6.63) (6.63) (6.63) (2.89) (8.19)
R2 0.49 0.30 0.41 0.34 0.36
Observations 6,603,702 6,603,702 6,603,702 4,402,468 4,402,468
HourF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
DateF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
58

===== PAGE 60 =====

Table 10: Repositioning and liquidity concentration: Arbitrum airdrop. This table presents
results of instrumental variable regressions that test causal effect of repositioning intensity and precision,
separately before and after the airdrop of ARB token on March 23, 2023. Panel A reports results for the
low-fee pool (ETH/USDC 0.05%), and Panel B for the high-fee pool (ETH/USDC 0.3%). Models (1)-(3)
report results for the pre-airdrop sample, and Models (4)-(6) for the post-airdrop sample. Models (1) and
(4) report the results for the first-stage regression, with repositioning intensity of LPs, Intensity , as the
dependent variable and Arbitrum as the main explanatory variable, which is used as an instrument for
the endogenous Intensity . Arbitrum takes value of 1 for Arbitrum pools, and zero for Ethereum pools.
Models (2) and (5) report results for the second-stage regression, with liquidity concentration within 2% of
the market price, Conc, as the dependent variable. We estimate liquidity concentration at the end of every
5-minute interval and the repositioning intensity over the previous 5-minute interval. The set of instruments
consists of all explanatory variables, except that Intensity is replaced with Arbitrum. Models (3) and (6)
report results for the second-stage regressions, with Arbitrum used as an instrument for the endogenous
P recision. The vector of control variables consists of V olume, V olatilityand |Return|. See Appendix E
for a detailed description of variable definitions. All regressions include hour- and day-fixed effects, with
standard errors clustered at the day level. T-statistics of the two-tailed t-test with the null-hypothesis of a
coefficient equaling zero are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
Panel A: ETH/USDC 0.05%
Before Airdrop After Airdrop
Int Conc Conc Int Conc Conc
2% 2% 2% 2%
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Arbitrum 0.22 *** 0.35 ***
(31.23) (17.93)
Intensity 0.04 *** 0.29 ***
(29.71) (35.37)
P recision 0.05 *** 0.68 ***
(13.90) (7.11)
V olume 0.00 0.01 *** 0.01 *** -0.03 ** 0.01 *** -0.00
(1.17) (53.87) (28.77) (-2.59) (6.59) (-0.53)
V olatility -0.90 -1.30 *** -1.22 *** 5.74 *** -3.34 *** 3.07 **
(-1.56) (-47.41) (-27.48) (3.28) (-12.26) (2.05)
|Return| 24.24 *** -1.57 *** -0.64 *** 20.11 *** -6.55 *** -6.67 ***
(15.58) (-21.40) (-9.10) (6.88) (-10.33) (-4.74)
Observations 87,698 87,698 33,849 27,119 27,119 14,138
HourF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
DateF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
59

===== PAGE 61 =====

Panel B: ETH/USDC 0.3%
Before Airdrop After Airdrop
Int Conc Conc Int Conc Conc
2% 2% 2% 2%
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Arbitrum 0.07 *** 0.12 ***
(2.74) (12.25)
Intensity 0.07 *** 0.65 ***
(27.16) (3.69)
P recision 0.06 *** 0.31 **
(7.04) (2.37)
V olume -0.15 *** 0.06 *** 0.04 *** 0.20 -0.08 -0.04
(-4.08) (44.17) (11.10) (1.57) (-0.92) (-0.54)
V olatility 3.09 *** -1.15 *** -0.63 *** -1.03 -0.59 0.00
(4.93) (-41.39) (-7.54) (-0.28) (-0.31) (.)
|Return| 8.90 *** -0.81 *** -0.34 *** 15.63 *** -10.37 ** 0.79
(8.10) (-11.25) (-3.71) (3.81) (-2.57) (0.50)
Observations 49,943 49,943 6,604 3,202 3,202 549
HourF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
DateF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
60

===== PAGE 62 =====

Appendix A
Estimating gas fees
Any transaction on a blockchain requires the payment of gas fees, which are used to com-
pensate validators for their work in verifying transactions and securing the network.
Gas fees are computed with the quantity of gas units required, which depends on the
transaction. For example, a trade on Uniswap v3 (Ethereum) requires on average 120K gas
units.
The price of one gas unit, the gas price, varies over our sample period, as shown in Panel
A of Figure A1. Panel B shows the gas fees to pay for a hypothetical trade on Uniswap v3
(Ethereum) that requires 120K gas units. These fees vary from as little as $1.30 in October
2022 to $160 during the period of Terra collapse in early May 2022. On average, a trade
that requires 120K gas units on Uniswap v3 (Ethereum) costs $14 in gas fees in 2022.
61

===== PAGE 63 =====

Figure A1: Gas price and gas fees on Ethereum.Panel A of this figure shows historical gas price
on Ethereum over 2022, downloaded from Etherscan. Panel B shows gas fees for a trade on Uniswap v3
(Ethereum), assuming that it requires on average 120K gas units.
Panel A
Panel B
62

===== PAGE 64 =====

Appendix B
Trading mechanics on Uniswap v2 and Uniswap v3
Uniswap v2. Uniswap v2 is a constant product market maker (CPMM), which is a widely
adopted subclass of automated market makers (AMMs). The price curve, or so-called bond-
ing curve, is defined as:
x · y = k (2)
where x is the current quantity of token X, the base token (e.g., BTC for BTC/USDT
pair), y is the current quantity of token Y, the quote token (e.g., USDT for BTC/USDT pair)
and k is the pool’s constant, showing the total liquidity available in the pool. In absence of
mints and burns, pool’s constant k has to preserve its value. For example, a trade (or swap)
that buys BTC with USDT will remove △x of BTC from the pool and add △y of USDT to
the pool. Denote the new amount of BTC in the pool after the trade as x′, i.e. x′ = x + △x,
and the new amount of USDT as y′, i.e. y′ = y + △y, with △x <0 and △y >0. CPMM
requires k to be the same before and after the trade:
x · y = (x + △x)(y + △y) = k (3)
Therefore, the product between the reserves of the pool’s two tokens is constant, provided
there is no changes to total liquidity in the pool. Figure A2 illustrates this trade as a
transition along the price curve from state c to state b. Note that the convexity of the curve
causes the trader to receive less BTC than the actual BTC value of the USDT added to the
pool, i.e. slippage of the trade is determined by convexity of the price curve.
[Insert Figure A2 approximately here]
The market price in Uniswap v2 pools is determined by the ratio of the current quantities
of two tokens in the pool:
63

===== PAGE 65 =====

pmkt = y
x (4)
which shows the market price of token X (BTC) in units of token Y (USDT). After the
trade, as in example above, price of BTC increases to p′
mkt = y′
x′ , because removing some of
BTC from the pool makes it relatively scarce. In contrast, adding USDT to the pool makes
it a relatively abundant asset, such that it becomes relatively cheaper.
In Uniswap v2, LPs are required to deposit their liquidity in a 50-50 ratio, i.e. they
deposit both tokens in equivalent quantities. If liquidity providers add liquidity to the pool,
the pool size increases, i.e. the pool’s constant k increases. The larger the pool size the lower
the slippage of a given trade. However, trading fees are then shared between a larger number
of LPs. Recent studies by Capponi and Jia (2021), Lehar and Parlour (2021), and Foley
et al. (2023) discuss the economics of Uniswap v2 in more detail. Specifically, they show
that LPs face a trade-off between the amount of fees earned from liquidity providing and
adverse selection cost, imposed on them by informed arbitrageurs. Lehar and Parlour (2021)
and Foley et al. (2023) further show that the pool size acts as an equilibrating mechanism
on DEXs, equivalent to the bid-ask spread on CEXs.
Uniswap v3. In Uniswap v2, liquidity deposited in the pool is uniformly distributed
along the price curve, i.e. it is available for trading on the entire price range, [0 , ∞[. The
advantage of this traditional implementation of AMM is that LPs earn fees irrespective of
the market price. However, it requires a great amount of capital to be “locked up” in the
pool without being “active”, i.e. used in swaps. For example, prices close to infinity are
definitely unrealistic, but the same amount of liquidity is reserved at these unrealistic prices
than at the market price.
Uniswap v3 seeks to improve “capital efficiency” of liquidity providers, by allowing them
to “concentrate” their liquidity on smaller price ranges. When they open a new liquidity
position, i.e. deposit their tokens to a Uniswap v3 pool, they have to specify a price range,
[pa, pb], where pa is the minimum price and pb the maximum price of token X in units of
64

===== PAGE 66 =====

token Y at which their position is active. According to Uniswap v3 whitepaper (Adams
et al., 2021), “a position only needs to maintain enough reserves to support trading within
its range, and therefore can act like a constant product pool with larger (virtual) reserves
within that range”.
Figure A3 illustrates the notion of “virtual reserves”. A position on a range of [ pa, pb]
and a market price pc ∈ [pa, pb] only needs to hold a smaller amount of real X reserves, xreal,
which are gradually depleted (i.e. swapped against Y reserves) until the market price, pc,
reaches the upper price bound, pb. If the market price reaches pb, then all X reserves are
depleted and the position is no longer active, i.e. stops earning fees. The position then
consists only of Y reserves. Similarly, this position only needs to hold yreal reserves, which
are gradually depleted until the market price reaches the lower price bound, pa, when Y
reserves are depleted and the position becomes inactive. Should the pool price fall back to
the specified price range, the liquidity position becomes active again. Thus, virtual reserves
(x and y) magnify real reserves ( xreal and yreal) in a way that the liquidity in the pool
matches that of the market price range 44.
[Insert Figure A3 approximately here]
The price curve for Uniswap v3 is a modification of x · y = k, such that the position is
solvent exactly within its price range, [ plower, pupper] (Adams et al., 2021):

x + L√pupper

(y + L√plower) = L2, (5)
where x and y represent virtual reserves, and L is a “liquidity” constant that shows the
amount of liquidity deposited for each position.
44Heimbach et al. (2022) provide mathematical relations between real and virtual reserves and discuss
them in more detail.
65

===== PAGE 67 =====

In contrast to Uniswap v2, the amount of tokens deposited in a liquidity position is no
longer in 50-50 ratio. In fact, it depends on the selected price range relative to the market
price, with larger reserves of Y required if the price range is skewed to prices lower than
the market price, pmkt. If the selected price range is strictly lower than the market price
(and excludes it), then LP only has to deposit token Y. This case corresponds to point b
being below point c on the price curve on Figure A3, i.e. pmkt > [plower, pupper]. Similarly,
if the preferred price range is strictly higher than the market price, then LP only has to
deposit token X. This case corresponds to point a being above point c on Figure A3, i.e.
pmkt < [plower, pupper].
Adding liquidity to Uniswap v3 pools. On Uniswap v3, LPs are able to specify
the price range on which their liquidity position will be active. To make this possible, the
space of prices is divided into discrete ticks, [ i, i ∈ Z]. According to Uniswap v3 whitepaper
(Adams et al., 2021), there can be a tick at every price that is an integer power of 1.0001,
such that the following relation holds for the price pi corresponding to tick i:
pi = 1.0001i (6)
Specifically, this relation implies that each tick is 1 bp (basis point) away from its neigh-
bouring ticks. However, not all ticks can be initialized, but only those that are divisible by
a pre-specified pool parameter, the tick spacing s. For example, USDC/ETH 0.3% pool has
a s of 60. Therefore, only ticks that are divisible by 60 can be initialized, i.e. (-120, -60, 0,
60, 120...)45. A tick range can then be defined as [ i, i+ s].
One liquidity position of an LP can cover one or more tick ranges, [ i, i+ s]. The liquidity
on each tick range [ i, i+ s], Li, is then an aggregation of all LP positions that are currently
45In general, lower values for s allow for more precise price ranges. However, gas fees for swaps might
be more expensive in pools with low s, because the trader is required to pay a constant gas fee for every
initialized tick that the swap crosses.
66

===== PAGE 68 =====

active on it. Therefore, aggregated liquidity in a Uniswap v3 pool is no longer constant (as
in Uniswap v2), but fragmented across multiple tick ranges. Figure A4 illustrates a stylized
distribution of liquidity on the price space for Uniswap v2 and Uniswap v3 (Adams et al.,
2021).
[Insert Figure A4 approximately here]
Let pi denote the price of token X (in units of token Y) that corresponds to tick i.
From Uniswap v3 whitepaper (Adams et al., 2021), we obtain the following relations for xi,
quantity of tokens X locked in the tick range [ i, i+ s], and yi, quantity of tokens Y locked in
the same tick range:
xi = Li
√zi
− Li
√pi+s
(7)
yi = Li · (√zi − √pi) (8)
where
zi =



pi if pmkt ≤ pi
pmkt if pi < pmkt < pi+s
pi+s if pi+s ≤ pmkt
Appendix D provides a numerical example of adding liquidity to USDC/ETH 0.3% pool.
67

===== PAGE 69 =====

Figure A2: Price curve for Uniswap v2: constant product market maker (CPMM).This figure
illustrates a swap on the BTC/USDT pool on Uniswap v2. Pool reserves of token X, i.e. BTC, are on the
x-axis. Pool reserves of token Y, i.e. USDT, are on y-axis. The price curve, x · y = k, ensures the constant
product between the reserves of the pool’s two assets (in absence of liquidity deposits/withdrawals). A buy
of BTC with USDT reduces the reserves of BTC from x to x′ and increases the reserves of USDT from y to
y′. The pool price after the buy moves upwards from pc to pb.
68

===== PAGE 70 =====

Figure A3: Price curve for Uniswap v3: constant product market maker (CPMM) with virtual
reserves. This figure illustrates the virtual reserves curve on Uniswap v3. A position on a range of [ pa, pb]
and a market price pc ∈ [pa, pb] only needs to hold a smaller amount of real X reserves, xreal, which are
gradually depleted (i.e. swapped against Y reserves) until the market price, pc, reaches the upper price
bound, pb. If the market price reaches pb, then all X reserves are depleted and the position is no longer
active, i.e. stops earning fees. The position then consists only of Y reserves. Similarly, this position only
needs to hold yreal reserves, which are gradually depleted until the market price reaches the lower price
bound, pa, when Y reserves are depleted and the position becomes inactive.
Source: Uniswap v3 whitepaper
69

===== PAGE 71 =====

Figure A4: Examples of liquidity distributions on the price space.Panel (I) shows that liquidity
distribution in Uniswap v2 is constant on the entire price range. Panel (II) shows an example of a single
position of a liquidity provider on Uniswap v3 with the specified price range [ plower, pupper]. Again, liquidity
provided is constant within the price range of this position. This price range can cover one or more tick
ranges [ i, i+ s]. Panel (III) shows fragmentation of liquidity across multiple tick ranges on Uniswap v3.
Liquidity within each tick range is constant and represents an aggregation of all LP positions active on this
tick range.
Source: Adams et al. (2021).
70

===== PAGE 72 =====

Appendix C
Trading on Uniswap v3
Trading on Uniswap v3 within a given tick range.Suppose we would like to submit
a trade to USDC/ETH 0.3% pool, i.e. swap tokens X and tokens Y. Let △x and △y denote
the total quantities of tokens X and Y to be swapped in a trade (for example, if we would like
to buy tokens X with tokens Y, we have △x <0 and △y >0). Since liquidity is fragmented
along tick ranges, we have to consider separately every tick range that is necessary for trade
execution. Let △xi and △yi denote the quantities of tokens X and Y to be swapped within
a given tick range [ i, i+ s]. Price curve in Equation (5) imposes:

xi + △xi + Li
√pi+s

· (yi + △yi + Li · √pi) =

xi + Li
√pi+s

· (yi + Li · √pi) = L2
i (9)
from where we obtain the following for △xi and △yi:
⇒



△xi = −
△yi·(xi+ Li√pi+s
)
yi+△yi+Li·√pi
△yi = − △xi·(yi+Li·√pi)
xi+△xi+ Li√pi+s
(10)
Tick-crossing trades on Uniswap v3. Below we provide general formulas for trades
that are too large to be executed within a single tick range and involve crossing several ticks.
Suppose we would like to sell tokens X (USDC) for tokens Y (ETH). We are adding △x >0
to the pool and withdrawing △y <0.
For a given tick range [i, i+ s], denote by △xmax
i the maximum quantity of tokens X that
you can add to this range (by taking reserves of token Y). Let △ymin
i denote the minimum
71

===== PAGE 73 =====

quantity of tokens Y that you can “add” to this range - or, in other words, the maximum
quantity of tokens Y than you can take from this range by adding tokens X. From liquidity
distribution of the pool, we know reserves yi for each tick range, such that △ymin
i = −yi.
We can then compute △xmax
i using Equation (10):



△ymin
i = −yi
△xmax
i = −
△ymin
i · (xi + Li√pi+s
)
yi + △ymin
i + Li · √pi
= xiyi
Li · √pi
+ yi
√pipi+s
Let {istart, istart − s, ..., iend} be the lower ticks of the consecutive tick ranges that we
use during the trade. We consume all available liquidity in the tick ranges of lower ticks
i ∈ {istart, istart − s, ..., iend + s}, and spend our remaining tokens X in the tick range of lower
tick iend, such that △x and △y can be expressed as follows:



△x =
X
i∈{istart,istart−s,...,iend+s}
△xmax
i + △xiend
△y =
X
i∈{istart,istart−s,...,iend+s}
△ymin
i + △yiend
⇒



△xiend = △x − P
i∈{istart,istart−s,...,iend+s} △xmax
i
△y
(10)
= − P
i∈{istart,istart−s,...,iend+s} yi −
△xiend ·(yiend +Liend ·√piend )
xiend +△xiend +
Liend√piend+s
(11)
Appendix D provides numerical examples of calculating slippage for trades within the
current market range and for tick-crossing trades. Below we also provide formulas for the
opposite trade direction, i.e. buying X with Y.
Opposite trade direction: buy X with Y. Suppose we would like to buy tokens X
with tokens Y. We are adding △y >0 to the pool and removing △x <0.
For a given tick range [i, i+ s], denote by △ymax
i the maximum quantity of tokens Y that
72

===== PAGE 74 =====

you can add to this range (by removing reserves of token X). Let△xmin
i denote the minimum
quantity of tokens X that you can “add” to this range, i.e. the maximum quantity of tokens
X than you can take from this range by adding tokens Y. From liquidity distribution of the
pool, we know reserves xi for each tick range, such that △xmin
i = −xi. We can then compute
△ymax
i using Equation (10):



△xmin
i = −xi
△ymax
i = − △xmin
i · (yi + Li · √pi)
xi + △xmin
i + Li√pi+s
= xiyi
√pi+s
Li
+ xi · √pipi+s
Let {istart, istart + s, ..., iend} be the lower ticks of the consecutive tick ranges that we
use during the trade. We consume all available liquidity in the tick ranges of lower ticks
i ∈ {istart, istart + s, ..., iend − s}, and spend our remaining tokens Y in the tick range of lower
tick iend, such that △x and △y can be expressed as follows:



△y =
X
i∈{istart,istart+s,...,iend−s}
△ymax
i + △yiend
△x =
X
i∈{istart,istart+s,...,iend−s}
△xmin
i + △xiend
⇒



△yiend = △y − P
i∈{istart,istart+s,...,iend−s} △ymax
i
△x
(10)
= − P
i∈{istart,istart+s,...,iend−s} xi −
△yiend ·(xiend +
Liend√piend+s
)
yiend +△yiend +Liend ·√piend
.
(12)
73

===== PAGE 75 =====

Appendix D
Numerical example
Adding liquidity to USDC/ETH 0.3% pool. To illustrate, suppose that an LP
would like to add liquidity to USDC/ETH 0.3% pool (with a s of 60). Assume the market
tick is 200618, such that the market price is:
pmkt = 1.0001200618
To convert prices to a human-readable format, we have to scale pmkt by 10(dy−dx), where
dy is the number of decimals for token Y and dx is the number of decimals for token X. In
our example, dy = 18 for ETH and dx = 6 for USDC:
pmktad j= 1.0001200618
10(18−6) = 0.00051558 ETH per USDC
which corresponds to 1 /0.00051558 = 1939.56 USDC per ETH
Suppose an LP would like to add 50 ETH (token Y) to the price range [plower, pupper] that
corresponds to tick range [ ilower, iupper] = [200520 , 200640], illustrated as Mint 1 on Panel
A of Figure A5. Note that this range includes two corresponding elementary tick ranges:
[200520, 200580] and [200580, 200640]. How many USDC (token X) does the LP have to add
to complete their liquidity position?
[Insert Figure A5 approximately here]
To compute the required quantity of tokens X, we first infer the liquidity Lpos of this
position from Equation (8):
Lpos = ypos√pmkt−√plower
= 50·1018
√
1.0001200618−
√
1.0001200520 = 4.505 · 1017
with zp = pmkt, because the position includes the market tick, plower < pmkt < pupper. Note
that we have to rescale 50 ETH to “Uniswap v3” format as follows:ypos = 50·10dy = 50·1018.
Given Lpos, we can compute xpos from Equation (7):
74

===== PAGE 76 =====

xpos = Lpos√pmkt
− Lpos√pupper
= Lpos
√pupper−√pmkt√pmkt·√pupper
Again to convert to “human readable” format, we have to scalexpos by 10dx, i.e. xposad j=
xpos/106 = 21812 USDC.
Suppose there are two additional mints to the pool, as illustrated on Panel A of Figure
A5. Table 2 below summarizes all three liquidity positions in the pool:
Table 2: Adding liquidity to USDC/ETH 0.3% pool
ilower iupper xpos ypos Lpos
Mint 1 200520 200640 21812 50 4.505e17
Mint 2 200580 200640 44934 40 9.281e17
Mint 3 200580 200700 250848 60 1.392e18
To compute aggregated liquidity on each tick range, Li, we have to add up liquidity
of all active liquidity positions, Lpos, on a given tick range. Panel B of Figure A5 shows
distribution of aggregated liquidity by tick range. For example, there is only one active
liquidity position on tick range [200520 , 200580]. Therefore, Li = Lpos = 4.505e17. On the
next tick range, [200580 , 200640], all three liquidity positions are active, such that Li =
P3
j=1 Lposj = 2 .771e18. From Equations (7) and (8), we can then compute aggregated xi
and yi liquidity reserves for each tick range [ i, i+ s]. Table 3 below summarizes distribution
of liquidity and reserves by tick range:
Table 3: Liquidity distribution by tick range
[200520,200580] [200580,200640] [200640,200700]
Li 4.505e17 2.771e18 1.392e18
xi (USDC) 0 134159 183427
yi (ETH) 30.58 119.42 0
75

===== PAGE 77 =====

Note that tick ranges that do not include the market tick, imkt = 200618, have only
reserves in one of the tokens, either X (if i > imkt), or Y (if i + s < imkt).
Trading on Uniswap v3 within a given tick range.Assume the current distribution
of liquidity in USDC/ETH 0.3% pool as on Panel B of Figure A5. Suppose we would like to
buy ETH with 200K USDC. How many ETH can we get?
We know that △xi = 200K. Further, from Table 3 we know Li, xi and yi for the market
tick range, [200580, 200640]. From Equation (10), we obtain for △yi:
△yi = −
200000·106(119.42·1018+2.771·1018·
√
1.0001200580)
134159·106+200000·106+ 2.771·1018√
1.0001200640

·1018
= −102.94 ETH
Overall, we obtain 102.94 ETH with 200K USDC. Therefore, the average execution price
is pavg = △y
△x = 102.94
200000 = 0.0005147 ETH per USDC. The slippage of this trade is:
Slippage =

pavg
pmkt
− 1
 =
 0.00051470
0.00051558 − 1
 = 0.0017 = 17 bp
Tick-crossing trades. In the numerical example above, we could execute the whole
trade within the market tick range, because the reserves of Y in this tick range were sufficient,
i.e. 119 .42 > 102.94. To illustrate a tick-crossing trade, suppose we would now like to buy
ETH with a larger quantity of 250K USDC. How many ETH can we get?
We first start computing △xmax
i for the market tick range, [200580,200640], given the
current reserves yi = 119.42 ETH and xi = 134159 USDC:
△xmax
i = xiyi
Li·√pi
+ yi√pipi+s
= 134159·106·119.42·1018
2.771·1018·
√
1.0001200580 + 119.42·1018
√
1.0001200580·1.0001200640
△xmax
i,ad j= △xmax
i
106 = 232064 USDC
This means that we can spend 232064 USDC in the market tick range, swapping them
for the full amount of 119.42 ETH reserves. Therefore, we are left with △xiend = 250K −
232064 = 17936 USDC to spend in the next (lower) tick range, [200520,200580] 46.
46In this simple example, our trade of 250K only crosses one tick. Therefore, there is only one term in the
sum P
i∈{istart,istart−s,...,iend+s} △xmax
i .
76

===== PAGE 78 =====

From Equation (11), we can now compute △y :
△y = −119.42 · 1018 − 17936·106(30.58·1018+4.505·1017·
√
1.0001200520)
0+17936·106+ 4.505·1017√
1.0001200580
△yad j= △y
1018 = −128.63 ETH
Overall, we obtain 128.63 ETH with 250K USDC. Therefore, the average execution price
is pavg = △y
△x = 128.63
250000 = 0.00051452 ETH per USDC. The slippage of this trade is:
Slippage = | 0.00051452
0.00051558 − 1| = 0.0021 = 21 bp
77

===== PAGE 79 =====

Figure A5: Numerical example: Adding liquidity to USDC/ETH 0.3% pool.
Panel A: Liquidity mints
Panel B: Liquidity by tick range
78

===== PAGE 80 =====

Appendix E
Variable Description Source
Arbitrum A variable that takes the value 1 if the transaction takes place on
Arbitrum, and zero otherwise.
The Graph
BlockScaling A variable that takes the value 1 if the transaction takes place
either on Arbitrum or on Polygon, and zero otherwise.
The Graph
Buy A variable that takes the value 1 if the trade is a buy of tokens X
with tokens Y, and zero otherwise.
The Graph
Intensity Repositioning intensity of liquidity providers, measured as the
value of repositioning mints (in $) over a 5-minute interval di-
vided by the total value minted (in $) over the same interval.
We define a repositioning mint as a mint preceded by a burn in
the same pool by the same liquidity provider in the previous 5
minutes.
The Graph
IntensF req Alternative measure of repositioning intensity, calculated as the
number of repositioning mints, divided by the total number of
mints over a 5-minute interval.
The Graph
Large A variable that takes the value 1 if the size of the trade exceeds a
specified cutoff (e.g., $1K or $5K), and zero otherwise.
Conc Liquidity concentration, measured as market depth within
1%/2%/10% of pmkt, divided by T V L. Market depth within x%
of pmkt is computed as the $ value of the liquidity between pmkt
1+x%
and pmkt · (1 + x%)
The Graph
pmid Mid price of a position, computed as √plower · pupper. The Graph
pmkt Current price of the pool The Graph
P olygon A variable that takes the value 1 if the transaction takes place on
Polygon, and zero otherwise.
The Graph
P recision Precision of repositioning mints aroundpmkt, computed and scaled
as 1 − 1.0001
−1
Gap·Length .
The Graph
Gap Position gap of repositioning mints, measured as a relative differ-
ence between pmid and pmkt, computed as
 pmid
pmkt
− 1
.
The Graph
Length Price range length of repositioning mints, computed as
|pupper−plower |
pmid
.
The Graph
79

===== PAGE 81 =====

Return 1-minute return of ETH/USD. Binance
Size Hypothetical trade size in 100, 500, 1K, 5K, 10K, 50K, 100K (in
$).
Slippage Slippage, computed as
 pavg
pmkt
− 1
. Please refer to Appendix X for
details on pavg computation on Uniswap v3.
The Graph
T V L Total value locked, i.e. $ value of all the liquidity in the pool. The Graph
V olatility Realized volatility of ETH/USD over the previous 24 hours, com-
puted as the square root of the sum of squared 1-minute returns
over previous 24 hours.
Binance
V olume Traded volume over previous 24 hours (in $). The Graph
80

===== PAGE 82 =====

Internet Appendix
Table IA1: Repositioning intensity and liquidity concentration: Large LPs.This table replicates
our analysis from Table 5 for a subset of large LPs. For each pool and chain, we sum up total minted and
burned liquidity (in $) for each individual LP over our entire sample period. We then define large LPs as
those in the top quartile of our sample distribution. Panel A reports results for the low-fee pool (ETH/USDC
0.05%), and Panel B for the high-fee pool (ETH/USDC 0.3%). Arbitrum (P olygon) takes value of 1 for
Arbitrum (Polygon) pools, and zero for Ethereum pools. Model (1) reports the results for the first-stage
regression, with repositioning intensity of LPs, Intensity , as the dependent variable and Arbitrum as the
main explanatory variable, which is used as an instrument for the endogenous Intensity . Model (2) reports
results for the second-stage regression, with liquidity concentration within 2% of the market price, Conc, as
the dependent variable. The set of instruments consists of all explanatory variables, except that Intensity
is replaced with Arbitrum. The table shows corresponding results for Polygon pools in Models (3) and (4),
with P olygonused as an instrument for the endogenous Intensity . Models (5) and (6) use BlockScaling
that takes value of 1 for both Arbitrum and Polygon pools, and zero for Ethereum pools, as an instrument.
The vector of control variables consists of V olume, V olatilityand |Return|. See Appendix E for a detailed
description of variable definitions. All regressions include hour- and day-fixed effects, with standard errors
clustered at the day level. T-statistics of the two-tailed t-test with the null-hypothesis of a coefficient equaling
zero are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
level, respectively.
Panel A: ETH/USDC 0.05%
Arbitrum Polygon BlockScaling
Int Conc Int Conc Int Conc
2% 2% 2%
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Arbitrum 0.25 ***
(32.87)
P olygon 0.19 ***
(27.33)
BlockScaling 0.21 ***
(35.16)
Intensity 0.08 *** 0.10 *** 0.10 ***
(44.84) (49.92) (52.41)
V olume -0.01 0.01 *** -0.01 *** 0.01 *** 0.01 ** 0.01 ***
(-1.58) (46.49) (-3.70) (50.86) (2.15) (53.91)
V olatility -0.53 -1.56 *** 0.18 -1.48 *** -1.53 *** -1.37 ***
(-0.91) (-39.64) (0.38) (-41.87) (-3.17) (-47.51)
|Return| 22.56 *** -2.51 *** 17.12 *** -2.26 *** 21.25 *** -2.80 ***
(16.61) (-24.52) (16.72) (-26.56) (19.10) (-34.40)
Observations 90,401 90,401 119,075 119,075 181,095 181,095
HourF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
DateF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes

===== PAGE 83 =====

Panel B: ETH/USDC 0.3%
Arbitrum Polygon BlockScaling
Int Conc Int Conc Int Conc
2% 2% 2%
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Arbitrum 0.17 ***
(14.44)
P olygon 0.21 ***
(28.36)
BlockScaling 0.18 ***
(25.46)
Intensity 0.06 *** 0.17 *** 0.11 ***
(27.21) (40.20) (41.73)
V olume -0.19 *** 0.06 *** -0.02 0.04 *** -0.02 0.07 ***
(-4.74) (37.89) (-1.10) (18.73) (-1.07) (48.48)
V olatility 3.27 *** -1.13 *** -0.05 -0.95 *** 0.22 -1.47 ***
(4.64) (-33.73) (-0.10) (-14.01) (0.41) (-33.85)
|Return| 9.76 *** -0.76 *** 18.27 *** -3.23 *** 18.37 *** -2.15 ***
(7.63) (-9.61) (11.36) (-16.39) (12.84) (-17.85)
Observations 34,264 34,264 38,424 38,424 54,151 54,151
HourF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
DateF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes

===== PAGE 84 =====

Table IA2: Repositioning intensity and liquidity concentration: Other pairs.This table replicates
our analysis from Table 5 for four other pairs that are actively traded across all three chains (i.e. 12 additional
pools): BTC/ETH 0.05%, BTC/ETH 0.3%, UNI/ETH 0.3% and LINK/ETH 0.3%. Arbitrum (P olygon)
takes value of 1 for Arbitrum (Polygon) pools, and zero for Ethereum pools. Model (1) reports the results
for the first-stage regression, with repositioning intensity of LPs, Intensity , as the dependent variable and
Arbitrum as the main explanatory variable, which is used as an instrument for the endogenous Intensity .
Model (2) reports results for the second-stage regression, with liquidity concentration within 2% of the
market price, Conc, as the dependent variable. The set of instruments consists of all explanatory variables,
except that Intensity is replaced with Arbitrum. The table shows corresponding results for Polygon pools in
Models (3) and (4), with P olygonused as an instrument for the endogenous Intensity . Models (5) and (6)
use BlockScaling that takes value of 1 for both Arbitrum and Polygon pools, and zero for Ethereum pools,
as an instrument. The vector of control variables consists of V olume, V olatilityand |Return|. See Appendix
E for a detailed description of variable definitions. All regressions include hour- and day-fixed effects, with
standard errors clustered at the day level. T-statistics of the two-tailed t-test with the null-hypothesis of a
coefficient equaling zero are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
Arbitrum Polygon BlockScaling
Int Conc Int Conc Int Conc
2% 2% 2%
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Arbitrum 0.18 ***
(26.16)
P olygon 0.12 ***
(22.47)
BlockScaling 0.15 ***
(28.36)
Intensity 0.11 *** 0.44 *** 0.29 ***
(34.47) (40.52) (48.86)
V olume 0.01 ** 0.03 *** 0.03 *** 0.03 *** 0.02 *** 0.03 ***
(2.55) (40.08) (8.06) (23.79) (5.27) (46.91)
V olatility -0.81 ** -1.76 *** 0.08 -2.52 *** -0.26 -2.49 ***
(-2.58) (-66.80) (0.34) (-38.92) (-0.96) (-58.44)
|Return| 20.35 *** -3.15 *** 17.51 *** -9.14 *** 20.68 *** -7.50 ***
(7.08) (-8.07) (12.06) (-15.23) (11.57) (-13.11)
Observations 57,904 57,904 98,608 98,608 131,461 131,461
HourF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
DateF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes

===== PAGE 85 =====

Table IA3: Repositioning precision and liquidity concentration: Arbitrum and Polygon.This
table presents results of instrumental variable regressions that test causal effect of repositioning precision of
LPs, separately for Arbitrum and Polygon. We use three measures of repositioning precision: Gap, Length
and P recision. See Appendix E for a detailed description of variable definitions. Panel A reports results for
the low-fee pool (ETH/USDC 0.05%), and Panel B for the high-fee pool (ETH/USDC 0.3%). Model (1)-(3)
report the results of the second-stage regressions with liquidity concentration within 2% as the dependent
variable. Arbitrum is used as an instrument for the endogenous repositioning precision. Models (4)-(6)
present corresponding results, with P olygonused as an instrument for repositioning precision. The vector
of control variables consists of V olume, V olatility and |Return|. All regressions include hour- and day-
fixed effects, with standard errors clustered at the day level. T-statistics of the two-tailed t-test with the
null-hypothesis of a coefficient equaling zero are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
Panel A: ETH/USDC 0.05%
Arbitrum Polygon
Conc, 2% Conc, 2%
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Gap -2.73 *** -4.76 ***
(-17.52) (-12.54)
Length -0.35 *** -0.50 ***
(-28.48) (-24.57)
P recision 0.12 *** 0.22 ***
(24.31) (18.00)
V olume 0.01 *** 0.01 *** 0.01 *** 0.01 *** 0.01 *** 0.01 ***
(15.97) (35.36) (25.24) (8.27) (18.51) (16.40)
V olatility -1.15 *** -1.41 *** -1.28 *** -0.65 *** -1.07 *** -0.89 ***
(-11.91) (-22.52) (-19.44) (-4.53) (-14.87) (-10.39)
|Return| -1.64 *** -2.37 *** -1.15 *** -2.12 *** -2.75 *** -1.76 ***
(-11.24) (-16.20) (-11.20) (-8.86) (-16.42) (-11.02)
Observations 47,987 47,987 47,987 65,146 65,146 65,146
HourF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
DateF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes

===== PAGE 86 =====

Panel B: ETH/USDC 0.3%
Arbitrum Polygon
Conc, 2% Conc, 2%
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Gap -0.77 *** -8.76 ***
(-7.29) (-3.71)
Length -0.06 *** -0.30 ***
(-9.89) (-16.98)
P recision 0.07 *** 0.24 ***
(8.06) (15.80)
V olume 0.04 *** 0.05 *** 0.04 *** -0.07 0.02 *** -0.00
(9.37) (17.81) (10.15) (-1.60) (4.26) (-0.13)
V olatility -0.81 *** -0.97 *** -0.59 *** 1.79 -0.61 *** 0.24
(-8.89) (-15.25) (-6.23) (1.52) (-4.41) (1.29)
|Return| -0.45 *** -0.27 *** -0.31 *** -2.19 ** -1.35 *** -2.26 ***
(-3.91) (-3.65) (-3.01) (-2.00) (-6.66) (-7.58)
Observations 7,153 7,153 7,153 10,746 10,746 10,746
HourF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
DateF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes

===== PAGE 87 =====

Table IA4: Repositioning precision and liquidity concentration: Other pairs.This table replicates
our analysis from Table 8 for four other pairs that are actively traded across all three chains (i.e. 12 additional
pools): BTC/ETH 0.05%, BTC/ETH 0.3%, UNI/ETH 0.3% and LINK/ETH 0.3%. We use three measures
of repositioning precision: Gap, Length and P recision. See Appendix E for a detailed description of variable
definitions. Model (1) reports the results of the first-stage IV regression with Gap as the dependent variable.
Model (2) reports the results of the second-stage regression with liquidity concentration within 2% as the
dependent variable. Blockscaling is used as an instrument for the endogenous repositioning precision (i.e.
Gap). Models (3) and (4) present corresponding results for Length as a measure of repositioning precision.
Models (5) and (6) present results for P recision. The vector of control variables consists of V olume,
V olatilityand |Return|. All regressions include hour- and day-fixed effects, with standard errors clustered
at the day level. T-statistics of the two-tailed t-test with the null-hypothesis of a coefficient equaling zero
are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.
Gap Conc Length Conc Precision Conc
2% 2% 2%
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
BlockScaling -0.003 ** -0.14 *** 0.13 ***
(-2.25) (-15.45) (10.64)
Gap -13.64 ***
(-4.69)
Length -0.30 ***
(-43.83)
P recision 0.28 ***
(19.27)
V olume -0.00 *** -0.02 * -0.07 *** 0.02 *** 0.08 *** 0.02 ***
(-6.80) (-1.68) (-10.74) (23.07) (8.95) (9.20)
V olatility 0.59 *** 5.23 *** 5.19 *** -1.03 *** -10.12 *** 0.04
(11.53) (2.98) (12.68) (-19.20) (-14.26) (0.26)
|Return| -0.02 -1.27 -6.14 *** -3.29 *** 5.06 *** -2.40 ***
(-0.19) (-0.95) (-5.63) (-10.40) (3.97) (-6.80)
Observations 36,726 36,726 36,726 36,726 36,726 36,726
HourF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
DateF E Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes