

===== PAGE 1 =====

Non-Atomic Arbitrage in Decentralized Finance
Lioba Heimbach
ETH Zurich
Switzerland
hlioba@ethz.ch
Vabuk Pahari
MPI-SWS
Germany
vpahari@mpi-sws.org
Eric Schertenleib
unaffiliated
Switzerland
eric.schertenleib@gmail.com
Abstract—The prevalence of maximal extractable value (MEV)
in the Ethereum ecosystem has led to a characterization of the
latter as a dark forest . Studies of MEV have thus far largely
been restricted to purely on-chain MEV , i.e., sandwich attacks,
cyclic arbitrage, and liquidations. In this work, we shed light
on the prevalence of non-atomic arbitrage on decentralized
exchanges (DEXes) on the Ethereum blockchain. Importantly,
non-atomic arbitrage exploits price differences between DEXes
on the Ethereum blockchain as well as exchanges outside the
Ethereum blockchain (i.e., centralized exchanges or DEXes on
other blockchains). Thus, non-atomic arbitrage is a type of
MEV that involves actions on and off the Ethereum blockchain.
In our study of non-atomic arbitrage, we uncover that
more than a fourth of the volume on Ethereum’s biggest five
DEXes from the merge until 31 October 2023 can likely be
attributed to this type of MEV . We further highlight that only
eleven searchers are responsible for more than 80% of the
identified non-atomic arbitrage volume sitting at a staggering
$132 billion and draw a connection between the centralization
of the block construction market and non-atomic arbitrage.
Finally, we discuss the security implications of these high-value
transactions that account for more than 10% of Ethereum’s
total block value and outline possible mitigations.
1. Introduction
The introduction of decentralized exchanges (DEXes)
has made the trading of cryptocurrencies a centerpiece of
decentralized finance (DeFi) . Today, a multitude of DEXes
exist on several different chains. The prices on each of
these DEXes are the product of previous transactions on
the respective DEX and thus can differ from the prices
quoted at a given time on centralized exchanges (CEX)
or other DEXes. These differences represent an arbitrage
opportunity, which a trader can exploit by buying the asset
at the cheaper venue and selling it at the other. We refer
to price differences between DEXes on the same chain as
atomic arbitrage, since these arbitrages can be carried out
within the same transaction, whereas non-atomic arbitrage
stems from price discrepancies involving DEXes on two
different chains or, presumably more common, centralized
exchanges. The prior is known as cyclic arbitrage and has
been extensively studied [1]. We focus on the latter, which is
naturally more challenging to analyze as it involves actions
outside the respective blockchain. We note that while non-
atomic arbitrage opportunities exist on various chains we
focus on Ethereum, as it is home to the by far largest portion
of DeFi applications [ 2].
Non-atomic arbitrage opportunities existed ever since the
launch of DEXes, as these naturally arise when you have
two markets quoting prices for the same assets. However,
Ethereum’s transition from Proof-of-Work (PoW) to Proof-
of-Stake (PoS) in September 2022 marked a watershed
moment, due to the changes in block building. On Ethereum
PoS time is divided into slots with each slot being assigned
to a single known validator, i.e., the PoS equivalent of
a miner, who is responsible for proposing a block and
extending the chain. While validators are assigned a slot,
around 90% of blocks are no longer built by the validator
themselves, but are instead outsourced through the novel
proposer-builder separation (PBS) to a small set of special-
ized builders [3]. These builders bid to have their assembled
block selected by the validator. The acquired block building
right is valuable partly due to users paying tips for block
inclusion, but, more importantly, due to maximal extractable
value (MEV), i.e., the value that can be extracted by strategi-
cally ordering, including or excluding transactions. Trades
exploiting non-atomic arbitrage opportunities make up a part
of MEV as arbitrageurs want to be the first to exploit this
opportunity, and therefore are keen to be included at the
top of the block [ 4].
These changes have generally made it easier for sophis-
ticated traders to extract value from non-atomic arbitrage
opportunities. Firstly, whereas on Ethereum PoW the miner
was a priori unknown, the advance knowledge of the valida-
tor is beneficial for the arbitrageurs as they can identify
slots that have been assigned to validators open to external
block builders, i.e., validators participating in PBS. Through
PBS arbitrageurs have a scheme by which they can relay
their transactions privately to the builder and do not risk
being front-run in the mempool, i.e., the public waiting area
for transactions. Secondly, block builders are incentivized to
maximize MEV , with some even specializing in non-atomic
arbitrage [4], institutionalizing it in block building.
In this work, we present the first in-depth analysis of
non-atomic arbitrage on Ethereum DEXes to show that non-
atomic arbitrage, a type of MEV , accounts for a significant
3866
2024 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP)
© 2024, Lioba Heimbach. Under license to IEEE.
DOI 10.1109/SP54263.2024.00182
2024 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) | 979-8-3503-3130-1/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/SP54263.2024.00256

===== PAGE 2 =====

proportion of the total DEX volume. We further identify
alarming centralizing trends in the block building market
as a direct consequence of non-atomic arbitrage.
Contributions. We summarize our main contributions
as follows:
• We develop a model to quantify the profits from non-
atomic arbitrageurs.
• We perform the first in-depth measurement study of non-
atomic arbitrage on DEXes and find that more than one-
fourth of the volume on the five biggest DEXes on
Ethereum is most likely non-atomic arbitrage.
• Our work finds that two searchers account for nearly
half the non-atomic arbitrage volume and highlights that
several builders operate (subsidized) integrated searchers
(i.e., the builder and searcher are controlled by the same
entity) doing non-atomic arbitrage.
• We show that non-atomic arbitrage is linked to times of
high cryptocurrency price volatility and that during these
times builders specializing in non-atomic arbitrage have
higher chances of being selected – centralizing the block
construction market.
• We discuss the implication of non-atomic arbitrage on
the ecosystem and point towards possible mitigations.
2. Background
In the following, we detail the relevant background of
Ethereum PoS (cf. Section 2.1), PBS (cf. Section 2.2),
DEXes (cf. Section 2.3), and MEV (cf. Section 2.4).
2.1. Ethereum Proof-of-Stake
Since the transition to PoS, Ethereum runs on two layers.
The execution layer, largely taken over from the former PoW
protocol, is tasked with validating and executing transac-
tions. Conversely, the consensus layer , situated atop the
beacon chain , is dedicated to reaching consensus among
validators, i.e., the PoS equivalent of miners. To become
a validator, one must lock, i.e., stake, 32 ETH in a specified
smart contract.
Time is divided into slots, periods of twelve-second
length, on the Beacon chain. In every slot, a single validator
is responsible for proposing a block, i.e., being a proposer.
Thus, there is a chance for a block to be proposed and for the
blockchain to be extended in every slot. For building a block,
a validator receives a fixed consensus layer block reward
(≈ 0.04 ETH). Additionally, the validator also receives a
variable execution layer reward for building the block. This
variable reward stems from fees being paid for transactions
to be included in the block. These fees can be relayed to the
proposer either directly through transaction fees or through
direct payment (i.e., coinbase transfers). On average, these
execution layer block rewards are around 0.12 ETH but vary
significantly as we find.
2.2. Proposer Builder Separation
PBS is a novel scheme that was designed for Ethereum
PoS [5] and through which the majority (around 90% [3])
of blocks are proposed. With PBS the previous roles of
the block proposer are separated into two tasks, namely
block building and block proposing. In short, specialized
block builders are tasked with building high-value blocks.
Amongst these blocks built by the builders, the validator
is expected to choose the block with the highest bid, i.e.,
the amount the proposer would receive, and proposes the
block to the network.
Ethereum network & mempool
proposerrelay(s)builder(s)searcher(s)
private order flow
1 2 3
44
Figure 1: PBS scheme visualization. In step 1⃝, a searcher
sends (bundles of) transactions to one or many builders
privately, the transactions included in the bundle can be from
the public Ethereum mempool, private order flow or from the
searcher itself. The builder then builds a high-value block
with bundles received from searchers, as well as transactions
from the public mempool or private order flow. In step 2⃝,
the builder sends the block to the relay. The relay checks
that the block complies with its policies. Then, if requested
by the proposer, the relay passes the highest valid bid and
corresponding block header on to the proposer in step 3⃝.
The proposer chooses the highest value block amongst the
blocks received from the relays, signs the header, and returns
it to the relay. This prompts the relay to reveal the full block
and broadcast it to the public Ethereum network in step 4⃝.
Figure 1 depicts the PBS scheme and we detail the roles
of each of the players in the following:
Searchers scan the mempool and look for profitable
(bundles of) transactions, generally these transactions in-
volve MEV opportunities, such as sandwich attacks, arbi-
trage, or liquidations. They pass their bundles to builder(s)
privately to avoid them being copied by predatory trading
bots scanning the mempool.
Builders combine bundles received from searchers they
are connected to, with private and public transactions to
build high-value blocks. Once a block is built they forward
the block to one or many relays along with how much they
are willing to give the proposer to choose their block – the
bid. In case their block is later chosen by the proposer, the
builder’s profit is the difference between the block’s value
and the bid.
Relays are connected to builders. When they receive
blocks from builders, they check that the block is valid,
that the payment to the proposer is as indicated in the
3867

===== PAGE 3 =====

bid, and that the block complies with any censoring filters
implemented by the relay. They identify the block with the
highest bid. Then, they send the block header, along with the
size of the payment to the proposer.
Proposers request blocks from all relays they are
connected to. They are expected to choose the block with the
highest bid if the value of this bid exceeds the value of the
block they built themselves. Once they have chosen a block,
they sign the block header received from the relay which will
prompt the relay to broadcast the block.
Note that in blocks built through PBS, the block builder
is indicated as the fee recipient and the builder transfers
the promised amount to the proposer in the block’s last
transaction. We further highlight that one entity can play
all the roles at once. For instance, if a builder also runs
a searcher we would refer to this as an integrated seacher.
2.3. Decentralized Exchanges
DEXes are one of the most popular DeFi applica-
tions. They allow users to exchange cryptocurrencies on
the blockchain without giving up custody of their assets.
While traditional CEXes generally utilize a limit order book
to match orders, most DEXes are constant function market
makers (CFMM). With a CFMM, users execute their order
against a liquidity pool holding reserves of two or more
cryptocurrencies. Trades against the pool execute according
to a pre-defined trading function specified in the pool’s smart
contract, i.e., the pool only accepts trades that keep its trad-
ing function constant. Importantly, every trade that executes
in a CFMM pool moves the pool’s price deterministically,
dependent only on the pool’s reserves ahead of the trade
and the trade’s input size. Consequently, if an arbitrage
opportunity arises, the assets locked in the liquidity pool
determine how large the arbitrage trade can be. The larger
the liquidity pools, the larger the required arbitrage trades
are to synchronize the prices across different trading venues.
2.4. Maximal Extractable Value
MEV refers to the profit that can be extracted through
including, excluding, and reordering transactions in a
block [6]. The most commonly observed and measured types
of MEV on Ethereum are sandwich attacks, cyclic arbitrage,
and liquidations. Succinctly, a sandwich attack has the
attacker front- and back-running the victim’s transaction
on a DEX for a profit. A cyclic arbitrage profits from
price differences across DEXes. Liquiditations close under-
collateralized loans on lending protocols. The liquidator can
buy the collateral of a position at a discount, as a reward
for repaying the debt. Oftentimes the liquidator then sells the
collateral on a DEX [7].
3. Data Collection
To measure the prevalence and impact of non-atomic
arbitrage trades on the Ethereum ecosystem, we collect
four different types of data. Namely, we collect Ethereum
blockchain (cf. Section 3.1), PBS relay data (cf. Section 3.2),
Ethereum network data (cf. Section 3.3), and cryptocurrency
price data (cf. Section 3.4). All data we collect from block
15,537,393, i.e., the block of the merge on Ethereum on
15 September 2022, to block 18,473,542, i.e., the last block
on 31 October 2023. Thus, our data set covers the entire
history of the Ethereum PoS up until 31 October 2023.
3.1. Ethereum Blockchain
Decentralized Exchange Trades. We collect data for
all DEX trades on Uniswap V2, Uniswap V3, Curve, Bal-
ancer and Sushiswap. These five biggest DEXes in terms of
total value locked (TVL) on the Ethereum blockchain [8].
In total, our data set comprises 77,019,583 swaps on DEXes.
For each trade, we identify the pool in which the trade was
executed as well as the amount of tokens exchanged. We
further, record whether the trade was executed successfully,
i.e., whether the execution of the transaction was successful.
Maximal Extractable Value. To differentiate non-
atomic arbitrage trades from types of MEV and to compare
their respective prevalence on DEXes, we collect MEV
transaction labels from zeromev [9]. These labels specify
whether a transaction was part of a sandwich attack (i.e.,
victim and attacker transaction), performs a cyclic arbitrage,
or a liquidation.
Rewards Data. We collect Ethereum execution layer
reward data. In particular, for each block we calculate the
rewards received by the block’s fee recipient: (1) priority gas
fees, and (2) tips, i.e., direct transfers to the fee recipient
address. Note that the execution layer rewards are also re-
ferred to as the block value. We, further, record information
regarding the PBS scheme rewards. In the PBS scheme
specification, the block builder is indicated as the block’s
fee recipient and in the block’s last transaction transfers the
agreed-upon value to the block proposer. Thus, for blocks
that follow the PBS specification we record the amount
transferred by the fee recipient to the block proposer.
3.2. PBS Relays
We collect data from eleven relays: Aestus, Agnostic,
Blocknative, bloXroute (Ethical), bloXroute (Max Profit),
bloXroute (Regulated), Eden, Flashbots, Manifold, Relayoor
and UltraSound. The relays implement public APIs that
give access to the blocks delivered by the relays to the
proposers, as well as the bids received by the builders.
Note that some relay APIs, namely Blocknative, bloXroute
(Ethical), Eden, and Relayoor, were not reachable. For these,
our data only extends to 31 April 2023, i.e., the last time
we scraped the data. Further, bloXroute (Ethical), bloXroute
(Max Profit), and bloXroute (Regulated) removed access for
builder bids from their APIs. When querying the builder bids
API for blocks that passed through the respective bloXroute
relay, the response is consistently empty. Thus, for the three
bloXroute relays the bid data only extends to 31 January
3868

===== PAGE 4 =====

proposerrelaybuildersearcher
1⃝ a price difference
between on-chain
DEXes and off-chain
markets occurs
2⃝ seacher sends
non-atomic ar-
bitrage transaction
TA to builder
3⃝ builder builds
high value block
and includes tx
TA from searcher
3⃝ builder builds
high value block
and includes tx
TA from searcher
3⃝ builder builds
block with TA
and sends it to
relay with the bid
4⃝ if requested,
relay sends highest
value block to
proposer
5⃝ proposer picks
highest bidding block
with transaction TA
and proposes the block
Figure 2: Non-atomic arbitrage illustration. A price difference between DEXes and off-chain markets occurs (step 1⃝),
imagine that the ETH-USDT price is higher on off-chain markets than on-chain markets. In step 2⃝, the searcher submits
transaction TA to profit from this price difference to the builder, i.e., buys ETH for USDT on DEXes. The builder then
includes transaction TA (as long as the fees paid by the transaction are sufficient) in the block and forwards the block to
the relay along with the bid (step 3⃝). The relay chooses the block with the highest bid to pass on the to proposer
(step 4⃝). From all relays, the proposer picks the highest value block, and if this block includes TA the arbitrage trade
executes. Importantly, this arbitrage opportunity is non-atomic as it includes swaps on- and off-chain.
2023, i.e., the last time we scraped that data and received
non-empty responses.
Importantly, the data by the relays is self-reported and
thus requires some trust in the relays, as it cannot be fully
verified. However, we combine our Ethereum blockchain
reward data set with our PBS data set to verify that the block
values reported by the relays correspond to those received by
the validators. If this is not the case, we disregard any relay
bid data for that block.
3.3. Ethereum Network
To obtain block times, i.e., the time at which a block was
first seen in the network, and to identify private transactions
we use Ethereum network data from the Mempool Guru
project [10]. The Mempool Guru project runs geographi-
cally distributed Ethereum nodes. Each node records the
timestamp at which it first saw any block or transaction.
The projects data collection method is detailed in [11]. We
take the earliest timestamp across the nodes operated by
the Mempool Guru project as the block time and consider a
transaction private if not one node saw the transaction before
the block it is included in was seen in the network.
3.4. Cryptocurrency Price
We obtain historical cryptocurrency price data from
Binance.com [12] and CoinMarketCap [13]. In particular,
we obtain candlestick data from Binance.com with an inter-
val of a second as well as aggregate trade data for ETH
and BTC. We further obtain daily candlestick data from
CoinMarketCap for 60 cryptocurrencies.
4. Non-Atomic Arbitrage on DEXes Model
We illustrate the process a non-atomic arbitrageur fol-
lows to get the on-chain leg of the trade included in Figure 2.
Upon detecting an arbitrage opportunity, the searcher sub-
mits the desired transaction to the builder. The builder then
builds their block and sends it together with their bid to
the relay. Next, if requested, the relay sends the highest
value block to the proposer who in turn picks the highest
bidding block to propose to the network. Importantly, even
though visualized separately one entity could for instance
operate a builder and a searcher. In this case, we would
refer to the latter as an integrated searcher.
4.1. Non-Atomic Arbitrageur Model
In this section we develop a model for the profit of a non-
atomic arbitrageur between two currencies X and Y . As
discussed in Section 2.3, most DEXes are a CFMM with
the largest DEX being Uniswap [8]. Uniswap currently has
two active versions, V2 [14] and V3 [15]. Here, we focus
on the V2 version, which is also employed by the DEX
Sushiswap [16], but the model also holds for V3 between
two ticks. The Uniswap CFMM imposes, x·y = L2, where x
and y stand for the number of X- and Y -tokens locked
in the liquidity pool, and L is referred to as the liquidity.
The (marginal) price P for X-tokens in terms of Y -tokens
is given as P = y/x. The reserves can be expressed in
terms of the liquidity and price by solving for x and y,
yielding x = L/
√
P , y = L
√
P .
The price on a DEX on Ethereum is Pon and the average
off-chain price is ˜Poff, i.e., the average price received for an
order.1 We denote the price difference between the off-chain
and on-chain as ∆P = ˜Poff −Pon. Without loss of generality,
we assume the searcher discovers ∆P >0, i.e., the price of
X-tokens off-chain is higher such that the arbitrageur buys
X-tokens on the DEX. During the trade, they pay ∆y of
which f ·∆y is paid in fees to the liquidity providers, where
f is the protocol fee. With this and the constant product
1. The average price ˜Poff can contain transactions on multiple off-chain
exchanges. In general, it is the best price attainable for a transaction of
a given size.
3869

===== PAGE 5 =====

L2 = xy, the amount of X-tokens the trader receives is
given by
∆x = x(1−f )∆y
y+(1−f )∆y .
Apart from f, the arbitrageur is charged a fee by the off-
chain exchanges which we denote as g.
As long as the off-chain price remains higher than
the on-chain price, the arbitrageur can extract more value
by buying more ∆x on the DEX. Thus, the arbitrageur
will trade on the DEX until the price they receive for an
infinitesimal unit of X is ˜Poff (1 − g).2 The pool’s marginal
price at the end of the trade is then given by
Pend = ˜Poff (1 − g)(1 − f ) = y+(1−f )∆y
x−∆x .
Simultaneously, to this buy order, the arbitrageur sells the
same amount of X-tokens, ∆x through the off-chain ex-
changes at an average price of ˜Poff.
Thus, the arbitrageur receives
∆yoff = ˜Poff (1 − g)∆x = x∆y
x−∆x ,
where we used the previous two equations. Finally, we can
compute the arbitrageurs profit by solving ∆P for ∆y and
inserting it in the above equation for ∆yoff which leads to
∆yoff − ∆y = L
√Pon−
√
(1−f )(1−g)(∆P +Pon)
2
(1−f )√Pon
where we also expressed x and y in terms of L and the start-
ing on-chain price Pon. The profit as a function of the price
change ∆P is plotted in Figure 3. The profit becomes signif-
icant for larger price changes, showing that sufficient price
difference will attract non-atomic arbitrage trades. Note that
profitable arbitrage only exists for Pon < ˜Poff (1−f )(1−g),
as otherwise the fees paid to the liquidity pool exceed the
price difference that can be profited from.
0.004 0.005 0.006 0.007 0.008 0.009 0.010
P
0
2
4
6
8
yoff y
Figure 3: Arbitrageur profit as a function of the price
difference for L = 106, Pon = 1, f = 0.3%, and g = 0.1%.
Note we only plot the profit in the profitable range.
We further note that while an arbitrageur still needs to
pay the builder to have their trade included, the result shows
how valuable the arbitrage trade is for the searcher and limits
the bid they would be willing to submit.
2. Here we assume that the off-chain price is unaffected by the arbitrage.
In practice, the arbitrageur would receive a quote for a given trade size and
can be used as ˜Poff.
05:16:40 05:16:45 05:16:50
0
2
4
6
8
10
12bid [ETH]
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
relative price change [%]
rsyncbuilder
beaverbuild
rest
ETH-USDT
BTC-USDT
chosen bid time
Figure 4: Bids submitted by builders for block 18,360,789
on 16 October 2023, along with the ETH-USDT and BTC-
USDT price on Binance.com. Notice that the bids, especially
those previously identified “HFT” builders [4] start to rise
significantly shortly after the prices on Binance.com start to
move. Importantly, this price movement creates an arbitrage
opportunity between DEXes on Ethereum and Binance.com.
Further, the bids submitted by HFT builders exceed those by
the remaining builders significantly.
4.2. Case study of Block 18,360,789
To provide a better understanding of non-atomic arbi-
trage, we go through a case study of block 18,360,789
– a block with a significant price change in the lead-up
to the block, i.e., the time between the previous block
proposal and the block proposal itself. In Figure 4, we
plot the time and the value of bids from the builders. Note
that we hightlight bids from rsyncbuilder (shown in red)
and beaverbuild (shown in blue), as these two builders
were previously identified as having integrated searchers
that perform these non-atomic arbitrage trades [4]. The bids
from all remaining builders are shown in yellow. We further
indicate the time of the bid corresponding to the block
that was chosen by the proposer, i.e., the relays deliver
the highest bid to the proposer when the proposer requests it.
Finally, we also plot the relative price change of ETH-
USDT and BTC-USDT on Binance.com during the same
time. Recall that USDT is a stablecoin pegged to the $.
One immediately notices that the time in the lead-
up to the block is characterized by extremely high price
volatility of both ETH and BTC in comparison to USDT.
The relative price change exceeds 0.6% and 1.3% in less
than ten seconds respectively. This price change creates an
arbitrage opportunity, as the prices on DEXes do not move in
between blocks. Thus, as outlined in the previous section,
the first transaction in a DEX pool can close this price
difference and thereby profit from the arbitrage opportunity.
Coming back to Figure 4, we can observe that around
five seconds after the price starts to change on Binance.com
the bids start to increase. At this point, the price difference
appears to be big enough for non-atomic arbitrage to be
profitable. Further, we find that bids from the builders that
are associated with non-atomic arbitrage transactions are
higher than those from the rest and that the bids continue
3870

===== PAGE 6 =====

tx index searcher pool tokenIn tokenOut amount [$]
0 rsyncsearcher3 0x88e6a...f5640 USDC ETH 2148195.308
1 rsyncsearcher3 0x99ac8...abc35 USDC BTC 659507.701
2 rsyncsearcher3 0x4585f...a20c0 ETH BTC 554524.411
3 rsyncsearcher3 0x9db9e...8425b USDT BTC 186858.044
4 rsyncsearcher3 0x11b81...697f6 USDT ETH 523225.597
5 rsyncsearcher3 0x4e68c...dfa36 USDT ETH 524150.487
6 rsyncsearcher3 0xcbcdf...d62ed ETH BTC 495617.185
8 searcher1 0x8ad59...6e6d8 USDC ETH 562787.652
9 rsyncsearcher3 0x60594...5a270 DAI ETH 116090.952
10 rsyncsearcher3 0xc2e9f...a25f8 DAI ETH 105871.055
12 searcher1 0xd51a4...aae46 USDT BTC 17463.007
14 rsyncsearcher3 0x391e8...86649 DAI BTC 9214.814
17 rsyncsearcher3 0x06da0...84553 USDT ETH 18283.993
18 rsyncsearcher3 0xc3d03...5882f DAI ETH 10533.977
19 rsyncsearcher3 0x397ff...7aca0 USDC ETH 14457.825
21 rsyncsearcher3 0xceff5...d3a58 ETH BTC 15450.829
22 rsyncsearcher3 0x824a3...c0673 ETH BLUR 11451.829
23 rsyncsearcher3 0x56534...a83b2 USDT BTC 4822.975
27 rsyncsearcher3 0xcbfb0...7ef3c USDC BTC 1538.249
28 rsyncsearcher3 0x290a6...f5b42 ETH MATIC 14629.722
31 searcher5 0xcd828...a9fbf FXS ETH 6247.832
33 rsyncsearcher3 0x919fa...daf79 ETH CRV 4954.943
35 rsyncsearcher3 0x34704...08d60 USDT UNI 1106.016
36 rsyncsearcher3 0xa3f55...dfd74 LDO ETH 9727.578
43 rsyncsearcher3 0x9febc...c82ae USDC 1INCH 516.780
44 rsyncsearcher3 0x1d420...bd801 ETH UNI 6336.821
TABLE 1: Non-atomic arbitrages identified in block
18,360,789 on 16 October 2023. There are 26 non-atomic
arbitrage swaps with a total volume of $6,023,565 executed
by merely three searchers (cf. [17] for a mapping from
address to searcher name). Further, rsyncbuilder’s integrated
searcher is responsible for 23 of these arbitrages. We in-
dicate the tx index, the searcher, pool, and the tokenIn
(the token that was sold), the tokenOut (the token that was
bought), and the amount (the trade volume in $).
to increase as the ETH and BTC prices on Binance.com
increase. The block chosen by the proposer was built by
rsyncbuilder and its bid, i.e., the value received by the pro-
poser was a staggering 10.32 ETH ( ≈$23,000 at the time of
this writing). In Table 1, we take an in-depth look a the non-
atomic arbitrage trades we identified with our heuristics that
we will introduce in the following Section 5. In the block,
there were 26 transactions with volume exceeding $6 million
that we identified as performing non-atomic arbitrage trades.
Remarkably, all but three of these transactions were by
the rsyncsearcher3 – a searcher we identified to be linked
to the rsyncbuilder that won the block (cf. Section 6.3).
Additionally, we highlight that the rsyncsearchers paid a
remarkable 11.15 ETH (i.e., more than the PBS bid) for
their transactions. Thus, the rsyncbuilder built a high-value
block largely attributed to fees paid by trades we labeled
as non-atomic arbitrage by its own integrated searcher.
Note that most of trades buy ETH or BTC for a sta-
blecoin. As we saw in Figure 4 the prices of these two
cryptocurrencies rose on Binance.com, and they were thus
trading for cheaper on DEXes at the beginning of the block.
For example, if we look at the price at the beginning of the
block, we see that the price of the ETH-USDT Uniswap
V3 pool was 1563.57, and at the end of the block, it
was 1574.15. The Binance.com price was 1564.61 at the
beginning of the block’s slot, while it rose to 1574.63 by
the time the block was proposed. Notice that the arbitrageurs
drove the price almost exactly to the off-chain price, as we
show to be optimal in our previous analysis (cf. Section 4.1).
Additionally, some transactions exchange cryptocurrencies
for cryptocurrencies (i.e., no stablecoins), such as the trans-
action at index 2 and 6, which exchange ETH for BTC.
The relative price increase measured in USDT of BTC was
higher than that of ETH. Thus, BTC relative to ETH was
also available for cheaper on DEXes at the beginning of
the block. Hence, the searcher also swaps ETH for BTC.
5. Identifying Non-Atomic Arbitrage Trades
With our acquired understanding of non-atomic arbi-
trage, we now describe our procedure to identify non-atomic
arbitrage trades on the Ethereum blockchain. We start by
noting that identifying this type of MEV transaction is more
difficult and less clear-cut than other types of MEV such as
sandwich attacks, cyclic arbitrage or liquidations previously
measured on Ethereum blockchain [1], [7], [18], [19], [20].
All transactions related to these types of MEV can be
found on the same blockchain. Importantly, we only observe
one side of the arbitrage on the Ethereum blockchain and
have practically no visibility into the other side of the
arbitrage. Presumably, as mentioned previously the other
side of the arbitrage executes on a CEX, as these have
the most significant liquidity for cryptocurrency trading.
Thus, we do not have access to de-anonymized data and the
detail of data available also differs highly between CEX.
Additionally, it is also possible that the other side of the
arbitrage executes on a different blockchain, but here we
are also not able to link the identity of wallets on different
chains.
However, we are still able to infer whether a transaction
is likely to be a non-atomic arbitrage. The main assumption
that guides are following heuristics is as follows:
Assumption. Non-atomic arbitrage transactions have
a high value, i.e., a significant profit can be made. Thus,
searchers performing these non-atomic arbitrages are likely
to protect their transaction (i.e., submit it privately such that
it cannot be copied) and pay suspicious amounts to have
their “simple” swap included (i.e., tip the miner through
significant priority fees or direct transfers).
Guided by this assumption we apply the following five
heuristics to identify non-atomic arbitrage transactions.
Heuristic 1. The transaction is a simple swap, i.e., (1)
executes exactly one swap in a DEX, (2) is not labeled
as a sandwich attack (frontrun, backrun, or victim), a DEX
arbitrage, or a liquidation, and (3) does not use more than
400,000 in gas.
Heuristic 2. The transaction is private, i.e., it did not
enter the mempool before the block was propagated.
Heuristic 3. The transaction includes a coinbase trans-
fer to the fee recipient or its priority fee is at least 1 GWei.
Heuristic 4. The swap executed by the transaction is
either the first swap that executes in the pool in its direction,
or all preceding transactions had the same recipient.
Heuristic 5. The swap exchanges two established
tokens, i.e., traded on CEXes (cf. [17] for a list).
3871

===== PAGE 7 =====

total swaps simple private first swap in pool top tokens coinbase transfer priority fee coinbase transfer or priority fee all
heuristic 1 heuristic 2 heuristic 4 heuristic 5 heuristic 3
beaversearchers 1,188,696 0.982 0.815 0.826 0.822 0.608 0.313 0.917 0.580
rsyncsearchers 346,570 1.000 0.997 0.924 0.931 0.059 0.895 0.954 0.884
mantasearcher 60,813 0.999 0.941 0.921 0.955 0.940 0.057 0.977 0.879
overall 77,019,583 0.651 0.317 0.280 0.151 0.036 0.568 0.601 0.028
TABLE 2: Proportion of transactions from known integrated searcher (e.g., searchers associated with beaverbuild,
mantabuilder, and rsyncbuilder) our five heuristics apply to individually and together in comparison to all swaps on DEXes.
Heuristic 1 ensures that the transaction only executes
a “simple” swap on a DEX and that we do not mix it up
with another type of high-value MEV transaction.3 Together,
heuristics 2 and 3 allow us to identify that the transaction is
valuable as it was submitted privately and tips the validator.4
With heuristic 4 we ensure that the transaction is the first
transaction to execute in the respective direction in the pool.
If this were not to be the case, the price in the pool would
already have moved unfavorably for the transaction, and the
sought-after arbitrage transaction might already have been
closed. Finally, heuristic 5 ensures that there is likely to
be another market for the trade executed, i.e., that it is
possible to make the other side of the trade on a CEX
for instance. Note that a transaction that violates heuristics 2,
3, 4, or 5 might still be a non-atomic arbitrage, but in that
case, is likely to be a less sought-after opportunity. However,
wherever possible we are conservative with what we label
as non-atomic arbitrage. We also note that a transaction that
does not perform any arbitrage could fulfill all our heuristics.
Thus, to test our heuristics we measure the proportion of
transactions our heuristic applies to for integrated searchers
previously identified to be performing non-atomic arbitrage
on the Ethereum blockchain (e.g., searchers associated with
beaverbuild, mantabuilder and rsyncbuilder) [4] and com-
pare that figure to all transactions in our data collection
period. In Table 2, we record what proportion of trans-
actions each of our heuristics applies to. The last column
in Table 2 indicates what proportion of transactions from
these integrated searchers as well as overall our heuristics
capture. We find that our heuristics apply to 58.0%, 87.9%,
and 88.4% of transactions from the integrated searchers
associated with beaverbuild, mantabuild, and rsyncbuilder
respectively, but only apply to 2.8% of transactions overall.
When considering the integrated searchers from the
three builders known to perform non-atomic arbitrage, we
notice that our heuristics apply to nearly 90% of trans-
3. Note that we limit the size of the transaction in units of gas to ensure
that the transaction does not execute further complicated logic we have no
insights into. Without the gas limit we picked up transactions rebalancing
liquidity positions on Uniswap V3. The limit excludes these transactions but
is large enough for ordinary swaps on all five DEXes. A simple swap on
in Curve V2 pools consumes the highest amount of gas for the DEXes
we tracked at ≈350,000 gas, whereas rebalancing a liquidity position on
Uniswap V3 uses ≈450,000 gas.
4. For heuristic 3, we do not impose a minimum on the value of the
coinbase transfer as less than 5% of transaction make such a transfer.
Additionally, we set the minimum priority fee limit to 1 GWei (i.e.,
approximately the median priority fee of DEX swaps) to ensure that the
transaction is paying a significant tip. We do not set the limit higher as
beaverseachers (previously identified non-atomic arbitrage searchers) use a
priority fee of 1 Gwei for more than 50% of their transactions without
coinbase transfers.
actions of mantasearcher and the rsyncsearchers, but only
around 60% of transactions from the beaversearchers. In-
terestingly, mantasearcher tips through coinbase transfers
whereas rsyncbuild tips through priority fees. Transactions
from beaversearchers are especially less likely to be private
(heuristic 2), the first swap that executes in a pool (heuristic
4), and less likely to swap two established tokens (heuristic
5). When analyzing transactions by beaverbuild that do not
meet the heuristic, we find that sometimes it appears that
they still perform the non-atomic arbitrages, but that these
are less valuable, i.e., swap less known tokens and/or only
transfer smaller volumes. Thus, in these cases, it might also
be less important for beaverbuild to protect their transaction,
i.e., do not send the transaction privately. In other cases,
it appears that beaverbuild is not performing non-atomic
arbitrages, failed at performing the non-atomic arbitrage or
again only performs a less valuable non-atomic arbitrage,
as at least one swap that moves the price in an unfavorable
direction for beaverbuilds swap precedes it. Finally, we find
that for one month, the beaversearchers were not paying
tips, but were instead subsidized by the beaverbuilder (cf.
Appendix A.2). Thus, exclusively for beaversearchers, we
do not require them to fulfill heuristic 3, if the swap
executes in a block built by the beaverbuilder. In doing so,
60.4% of swaps by the beaversearchers fulfill these tailored
heuristics. We note that we likely do not capture all non-
atomic arbitrage transactions from beaversearchers as our
heuristics are potentially too strict, but stick to our heuristic
to avoid overstating the prevalence of this type of arbitrage.
Finally, we note again that our heuristics apply to the
(vast) majority of transactions from the previously identified
seachers, but only to 2.8% of swaps overall. Further, half
of these transactions are swaps that meet all heuristics from
the searchers associated with beaverbuild, mantabuilder, and
rsyncbuilder. Thus, we believe that our heuristics are well-
tailored to identifying non-atomic arbitrage. We will further
show in the following that eleven searchers are responsible
for more than 80% of these identified non-atomic arbitrage
trades, an additional indicator that our heuristics are well-
suited to capture non-atomic arbitrage.
6. Analyzing Non-Atomic Arbitrage
In the following, we analyze the non-atomic arbitrage
identified with our previously introduced heuristics.
6.1. Non-Atomic Arbitrage Trade Landscape
We start by providing a general overview of the non-
atomic arbitrage on DEXes. On average, we identify 5216
3872

===== PAGE 8 =====

Nov 2023 Mar May Jul Sep
0
20B
40B
60B
80B
100B
120B
cum. non-atomic arb. volume $ 
beaversearcher1
jumpsearcher
searcher1
rsyncsearcher1
rsyncsearcher2
mantasearcher
builder1searcher
rsyncsearcher3
beaversearcher2
searcher2
searcher3
rest
Figure 5: Cumulative volume of non-atomic arbitrage swaps
by searcher. In total, the non-atomic arbitrage volume during
our data collection period is $132 billion. We provide a
mapping from the searcher address to the searcher name
as part of our data set [17].
trades as non-atomic arbitrages per day during our data
collection window that spans a little over a year. This figure
is in comparison to 5219 sandwich attacks (front- and back-
running transaction counted as one), 1245 cyclic arbitrage
(i.e., atomic on-chain arbitrage), and 14 liquidations. Recall,
that sandwich attacks, cyclic arbitrage, and liquidations are
considered the most common and well-studied types of
MEV . Thus, non-atomic arbitrage, in terms of the number of
occurrences is the second most prevalent type of MEV out of
these four on the Ethereum blockchain. We provide a more
detailed comparison between non-atomic arbitrage and these
other types of MEV in Appendix C.
In Figure 5, we consider the cumulative volume of
non-atomic arbitrage over time and highlight the eleven
biggest searchers performing non-atomic arbitrage by vol-
ume. We provide a mapping from searcher name to address
in our data set [17]. Further note that some searchers (bea-
versearcher1, beaverseacher2, rsyncseacher1, rsyncseacher2,
rsyncseacher3, and mantaseacher) have names that sug-
gest that they are linked to large builders in the PBS
scheme (beaverbuild, rsyncbuilder and mantabuilder) [21].
This naming is due to our suspicion that the respective
builders and searchers are controlled by the same entities
and we will detail our reasoning in Section 6.3.
Returning to Figure 5, in total, the volume of trades we
identify as non-atomic arbitrage are responsible for $132 bil-
lion on DEXes, e.g., Uniswap V2, Uniswap V3, Sushiswap,
Curve, and Balancer. Startlingly, the total volume on these
five DEXes in the same period of time is $460 billion [22].
Thus, the identified non-atomic arbitrage accounts for nearly
30% of the total volume of the five biggest DEXes on the
Ethereum blockchain.
We reiterate here that there is no clear-cut way of iden-
tifying non-atomic arbitrage, as we lack data transparency
regarding the off-chain. However, the fact that merely eleven
searchers are responsible for 80% of the non-atomic arbi-
Nov 2023 Mar May Jul Sep
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
daily share of non-atomic arb. volume
beaversearcher1
jumpsearcher
searcher1
rsyncsearcher1
rsyncsearcher2
mantasearcher
builder1searcher
rsyncsearcher3
beaversearcher2
searcher2
searcher3
rest
Figure 6: Daily share of the non-atomic arbitrage volume
accounted for by the biggest eleven searchers. Notice that
large searchers go in and out of operation over time and
that on most days two searchers are responsible for more
than half the volume.
trage volume identified in our analysis and that we identify
the majority of their transaction as non-atomic arbitrage
trades for all but one searcher (cf. Appendix D), leads
us to believe that our heuristics are well-suited to iden-
tify non-atomic arbitrage transactions. Additionally, these
eleven searchers can further be clustered into eight entities,
three searchers are associated with rsyncbuilder and two
searchers are associated with beaverbuild (cf. Section 6.3 for
a detailed description of the searcher/builder relationship
identification). Thus, a very small number of entities is
responsible for the vast majority of the non-atomic arbitrage
volume on DEXes. In fact, the two biggest searchers, i.e.,
beaversearcher1 and jumpsearcher, account for 49.2% non-
atomic arbitrage volume. We further point out that many of
these large searchers (beaversearchers, jumpsearcher, rsync-
searchers, and mantasearcher) are rumored to be linked to
HFT firms operating in traditional finance [4], [23], a further
indicator that our heuristics capture non-atomic arbitrage
as well as a sign that big players from traditional finance
turning to DeFi for profits.
Finally, we highlight that two periods of time exhibit
significant increases in the cumulative volume: (1) mid-
November 2022, which is a period of time character-
ized by high volatility of cryptocurrencies during the FTX
bankruptcy [24], and mid-March 2023, which corresponds
to the USDC depeg and high cryptocurrency price volatil-
ity [25]. High cryptocurrency price volatility — leading
to price differences between cryptocurrency markets —
drives non-atomic arbitrage opportunities and these dramatic
increases in non-atomic arbitrage volume during periods of
high volatility are thus expected. We provide a more in-
depth analysis of the correlation between price volatility
and non-atomic arbitrage volume in Section 6.2.
In regards to Figure 5, we conclude that the non-atomic
arbitrage volume on DEXes is immense and controlled by a
few large entities. To gain a better understanding of the
3873

===== PAGE 9 =====

beaversearcher1 jumpsearcher searcher1 rsyncsearcher1 rsyncsearcher2 mantasearcher builder1searcher rsyncsearcher3 beaversearcher2 searcher2 searcher3
proportion of trades 0.704 0.865 0.867 0.867 0.721 0.814 0.661 0.673 0.634 0.893 1.000
proportion of volume 0.916 0.901 0.933 0.922 0.898 0.937 0.813 0.855 0.912 0.973 1.000
TABLE 3: Proportion of trades and value for each of the top searchers in pools between ETH, BTC, USDC, USDT, and DAI.
beaversearcher1jumpsearcher searcher1 rsyncsearcher1rsyncsearcher2mantasearcherbuilder1searcherrsyncsearcher3beaversearcher2
searcher2 searcher3
102
103
104
105
106
107
trade size [$]
Figure 7: Distribution of the trade size of non-atomic arbitrage transactions of each of the eleven biggest searchers in terms of
volume. The average trade size across these eleven searchers is $73,891.
evolution over time, we take a more in-depth look at the
share of non-atomic arbitrage volume controlled by the
large searchers in Figure 6. We start by noting that on
nearly 75% of days, merely two searchers are responsible
for at least 50% of the arbitrage volume – underlying
the high concentration in the non-atomic arbitrage market.
Interestingly, beaverseacher1, the biggest non-atomic arbi-
trage searcher, is the only major searcher operating through
our entire data collection period. Generally, beaversearcher1
accounts for at least 10% of the volume except for during the
two time periods characterized by very high cryptocurrency
price volatility in the previous, i.e., mid-November 2022
and mid-March 2023. Potentially, the non-atomic arbitrage
market becomes more competitive during days characterized
by exceptional events in the blockchain ecosystem, and
beaverseacher1 loses some market share as a result. The
second biggest searcher, jumpsearcher, on the other hand,
was operating since the merge but stopped in late July 2023,
while searcher1, the third biggest searcher, only started oper-
ations in mid-March 2023 and from then on was operating
throughout our entire data collection window. Interestingly,
the three searchers associated with rsyncbuilder all operate
during non-overlapping time windows, it appears that one
searcher is replacing the other – potentially upgrades to the
searcher smart contract. Furthermore, there was a period of
time between May and September 2023, when no searcher
we could associate with rsyncbuilder was operating.
To get a better understanding of the differences in
strategies utilized by the various searchers, we plot the
distribution of trade sizes for each searcher as a violin
plot in Figure 7. A violin plot includes a boxplot, which
indicates the lower quantile, median, and upper quantile,
as well as a kernel density plot to visualize the distribution
of values. We observe clear differences in the trade size
distribution between searchers (cf. Figure 7). For instance,
beaversearcher1’s trade size distribution is quite smooth
with the peak and median being around $10,000 and trade
sizes ranging from less than $100 to more than $10 mil-
lion. Interestingly, except beaverseacher2, all other major
searchers have larger median trade sizes for their non-atomic
arbitrage swaps. We further note that while their median
trade sizes are slightly higher than that of beaverbuild,
mantaseacher and builder1searcher exhibit similar trade size
distributions to beaversearcher1. A couple of searchers (e.g.,
jumpsearcher, searcher1, searcher2, and searcher 3) ap-
pear to be specialized in high-volume non-atomic arbitrage
trades. The median trade sizes of the former three all exceed
$100,000. Finally, we observe that the three rsyncbuilders
tend to have several peaks in their trade size distributions,
i..e, they seem to be biased towards several distinct trade
sizes. Further, we observe that with each iteration of the
rsyncsearcher, the median trade size declines. While we
cannot be sure what the cause of this is, it could be a sign
that with time rsyncsearcher is turning towards smaller and
likely less fought-after (as they are less valuable) non-atomic
arbitrage transactions.
In Table 3, we further analyze what proportion of non-
atomic arbitrage volume and swaps by each of the largest
eleven searchers are in pools between ETH, BTC, USDC,
USDT, and DAI. These are the biggest cryptocurrencies on
DEXes in terms of the number of swaps. One would assume
that a significant proportion of volume is in such pools,
given that these cryptocurrencies also have liquid markets
on both DEXes and CEXes. We find that for all searchers but
searcher3, who has exclusively had non-atomic arbitrage
trades between these five tokens, the proportion of trades
between these five tokens is smaller than the respective
proportion of volume (cf. Table 3). This discrepancy in-
dicates that higher volume non-atomic arbitrage trades are
executed between these five tokens, which is expected given
that comparatively the DEX pools for these five tokens
have higher liquidity. Therefore, it requires greater trade
sizes to move the price as outlined in Section 4.1. Except
for searcher3, we observe largely similar behavior in terms
of the proportion of volume/trades executed between these
five highly liquid tokens or otherwise for all searchers.
3874

===== PAGE 10 =====

0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
daily price volatility
Nov 2023 Mar May Jul Sep
0
0.5B
1.0B
1.5B
2.0B
daily volume of non-atomic arb. [$]
non-atomic arb. volume
ETH price volatility
BTC price volatility
Figure 8: Daily volume of non-atomic arbitrage trades along
with the daily volatility of the ETH and BTC price. The
correlation between the non-atomic arbitrage volume and
the ETH and BTC volatility is 0.725 and 0.729 respectively.
Interestingly, we notice again that with each iteration of
the rsyncsearchers, the proportion of trades/volume executed
between the top five tokens drops. Thus, it again appears
as if with time the rsyncbuilder is turning to potentially
less fought-after non-atomic arbitrage transactions.
6.2. Drivers of Non-Atomic Trades
In the following, we investigate the drivers of non-atomic
arbitrage trades on DEXes. Recall, that non-atomic arbitrage
leverages price differences between two markets (likely
an on-chain DEX and an off-chain CEX), and these are
expected to be heightened in times of high cryptocurrency
price volatility. In more detail, price volatility on CEXes
can drive non-atomic arbitrage transactions, as it signals
a divergence from the price at an on-chain DEX. Thus,
we commence by investigating the relationship between the
daily volume of trades we identified as non-atomic arbitrage
trades and the daily price volatility of BTC and ETH in
Figure 8. Note that we measure the BTC and ETH price
volatility since the change in cryptocurrency prices is closely
correlated to changes in the two [26]. We measure the daily
volatility by log10 (Phigh/Plow) , where Phigh and Plow are
the daily high and low of the price respectively.
Looking at Figure 8, we observe that days with a high
volume of non-atomic arbitrage trades tend to correspond to
days with high BTC and ETH price volatility. Additionally,
the highest volume days correspond to two periods identified
earlier: the FTX collapse in November 2022 and the USDC
depeg in March 2023. We further note that the correlation
between the daily ETH price volatility and the volume of
non-atomic arbitrage is 0.725 with a p-value of 1.30 · 10−69
– inferring extremely high statistical significance of the
correlation. For the BTC price volatility, the correlation is
even higher at 0.729 with a p-value of 2.86 · 10−68.
Note that the strong correlation between price volatil-
ity and non-atomic arbitrage volume does not necessar-
ily imply causation. To further explore relationship, we
calculate the correlation between volume (excluding non-
atomic arbitrage) and non-atomic arbitrage volume. The
MondayTuesdayWednesdayThursday FridaySaturdaySunday
048121620
time of day [UTC]
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
non-atomic arb. volume [$]
1e9
Figure 9: Non-atomic arbitrage volume by weekday and
time of day (UTC). Times of increased volume correspond
to US, Asian, and European market hours.
correlation is 0.655, and thus, lower than the correlation
between non-atomic arbitrage volume and price volatility
of 0.725 and 0.729 for ETH and BTC respectively. The
stronger correlation between non-atomic arbitrage volume
and price volatility, underlines the relationship between the
two. Additionally, we note that the correlation is lower
despite our heuristics being conservative and likely under-
counting the prevalence of non-atomic arbitrage, i.e., some
remaining volume is probably non-atomic arbitrage and
thereby correlated. Thus, price volatility of ETH and BTC
on CEXes likely drives non-atomic arbitrage on DEXes.
In Figure 9, we visualize the volume of non-atomic
arbitrage trades by weekday and hour using UTC as the
timezone. Observe that the highest volume in non-atomic ar-
bitrage trades is seen Monday through Friday between 14:00
UTC and 21:00 UTC, which corresponds to US market
openings. Especially US market opening at 14:30 UTC is as-
sociated with increased non-atomic arbitrage volume. An ad-
ditional, less noticeable cluster of non-atomic arbitrage vol-
ume is observed Monday through Friday around 0:00 UTC,
which corresponds to the opening of the Asian markets, and
even less noticeable Monday through Friday at 8 am UTC –
European market opening. This heightened volume during
market hours and especially during the respective market
openings is expected, as cryptocurrency prices are correlated
with the US markets [27]. Thus, volatility in cryptocurrency
prices is expected to increase during (US) market trading
hours. Hence, we see a rise in the volume of non-atomic
arbitrage trades during these times, as cryptocurrency prices
are most volatile. We observe a final and interesting peak in
non-atomic arbitrage volume on Wednesdays around 18:00
UTC. This corresponds to the time of the press conference
following the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting at
19:00 UTC and the preceding release of notes at 18:30
UTC [28]. In this meeting decisions regarding the federal
interest rate are made and they have led to significant market
and cryptocurrency price movement [29].
To conclude, we identified the expected link between
cryptocurrency price volatility and non-atomic arbitrage.
3875

===== PAGE 11 =====

beaverbuild
flashbots
builder0x69
rsyncbuilder
mantabuilder
builder1
bloxrouteM
blocknative
bloxrouteR
rest
beaversearcher1
jumpsearcher
searcher1
rsyncsearcher1
rsyncsearcher2
mantasearcher
builder1searcher
rsyncsearcher3
beaversearcher2
searcher2
searcher3
rest
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
proportion of volume
Figure 10: Proportion of non-atomic arbitrage transaction
volume by each searcher (y-axis) included in blocks by
each builder (x-axis). The darker a square, the stronger the
relationship between a builder/searcher pair.
6.3. Integrated Seachers
As mentioned previously, the searchers looking for
and executing non-atomic arbitrage opportunities and the
builders in the PBS scheme building the block need not
be separate entities. In fact, previous work [4] has demon-
strated that three builders (i.e., beaverbuild, rsyncbuilder,
and mantabuilder) are likely to operate their own non-atomic
arbitrage searchers but did not establish links between these
builders and specific searchers. These builders are referred
to as HFT builders. We move to link non-atomic arbitrage
searchers and builders in this section.
To start, we analyze what proportion of the non-atomic
arbitrage volume by each of the biggest eleven searchers is
included in blocks built by each of the biggest nine builders
(cf. Figure 10). Note that we identify the biggest searchers
and builders by the non-atomic arbitrage volume they traded
and included in their blocks respectively. We provide a
mapping from searcher/builder name to their address/public
key in our data set [17].
The darker the tone of blue in Figure 10, the larger the
proportion of non-atomic arbitrage volume by the searcher
in blocks by the corresponding builder. We, for instance,
observe that more than half (i.e., 79% and 82% respectively)
of the non-atomic arbitrage volume from beaverseacher1 and
beaverseacher2 is in blocks by beaverbuild. Thus, it is likely
that these two searchers are associated with beaverbuild and
we name them accordingly. Additionally, we find evidence
that beaverbuild was subsiding its integrated searchers for a
month as we detail in Appendix A.2. This further shows that
they are very likely to be the same entity.
Similarly, 83% of the non-atomic arbitrage volume of
mantasearcher is found in blocks built by the mantabuilder,
while 88% of volume from the rsyncsearcher2 and an aston-
ishing 98% of volume from the rsyncsearcher3 is included
in blocks by the rsyncbuilder. Note that there is no link
between rsyncsearcher1 and rsyncbuilder in Figure 10 even
though our naming suggests there to be a link. However,
we are able to establish a link between rsyncsearcher1
and rsyncsearcher2, as the bytecode of their contracts is
identical and they are thus likely to be the same entity
as established in previous work [20]. We further comment
that rsynbuilder was largely not operating at the same
time as rsyncsearcher1 (cf. Figure 14b). Finally, we find
a fourth, previously not identified, builder that is likely
running an integrated non-atomic arbitrage builder: builder1.
To be precise, 83% of the non-atomic arbitrage volume by
builder1seacher is located in blocks built by builder1seacher.
Figure 10 allows us to observe ties between builders
and searchers. However, at the same time, we also find
that non-integrated searchers (e.g, jumpsearcher, searcher1,
searcher2, and seacher3) have a harder time having their
non-atomic arbitrage trades included in blocks by the four
builders that have their own integrated builders, i.e., their
non-atomic arbitrage trades are generally in blocks by
flashbots, builder0x69, etc. Thus, it seems that either other
searchers are less likely to submit their transactions to these
four builders with integrated searchers or the four builders
favor their integrated searchers.
We further take an in-depth look at the connections
between HFT builders and their integrated searchers in
Appendix A.1. Our analysis finds that for all builders the
correlation between the share of daily blocks for which
they won the PBS auction and the daily share of arbitrage
volume by the respective integrated searcher is positive and
the correlation is significant. Additionally, this correlation
is slightly lower for beaverbuild and rsyncbuilder. This
difference possibly stems from the fact that these builders
also include significantly more sandwich attacks and cyclic
arbitrage (i.e., common MEV types) than builder1 and
mantabuilder. Thus, the value of their blocks is likely not
solely driven by non-atomic arbitrage transactions.
6.4. Impact of Non-Atomic Arbitrage Trades
To conclude our analysis, we discuss the impact of non-
atomic arbitrage and the vertical integration of searchers
specializing in this arbitrage. We start by noting that from
2023 onwards generally more than 50% of non-atomic arbi-
trage volume is found in HFT builder blocks (cf. Figure 11).
Often this share rises to around 75%. Recall, that there are
just four HFT builders, at no time were more than three
of them in operation, and from May 2023 onwards only
two were still operating (cf. Figure 14). Thus, we conclude
that these builders have a strong grasp on the non-atomic
arbitrage market.
As we established in the previous section, cryptocur-
rency price volatility can drive non-atomic arbitrage trans-
actions, as it signals a divergence from the price at an on-
chain DEX. Thus, we analyze the relationship between ETH
and BTC price volatility and the share of blocks won by
HFT builders (cf. Figure 12). We notice both an increase
3876

===== PAGE 12 =====

Nov 2023 Mar May Jul Sep
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
daily share of non-atomic arb. 
 volume in HFT builder blocks
Figure 11: Daily share of non-atomic arbitrage volume in
HFT builder blocks.
in the daily share of HFT builder blocks over time but
also a correlation between the share of blocks won by HFT
builders and the price volatility. To be precise, in October
2023 the correlation between the share of blocks built by
HFT builders and the Ethereum price volatility is 0.783 with
a p-value of 1.85·10−7, whereas it is 0.650 for the BTC price
volatility with a p-value of 7.51 · 10−5. Thus, we establish
that on high volatility days, these HFT builders specialized
in non-atomic arbitrage transactions are more likely to win
blocks. This finding is in line with a previous analysis by
Gupta et al. [4] that showed that between April and May
2023 beaverbuild, mantabuilder, and rsyncbuilder were more
likely to win the PBS auction as the price volatility of the
ETH-USD market on Binance.us increases.
To further investigate the effects of cryptocurrency price
volatility and thereby non-atomic arbitrage on the system,
we take a closer look at the volatility in the lead-up to a
block, i.e., for block n the price volatility between the time
block n − 1 and block n were first seen in the network. On
average (if blocks are not missed) this is twelve seconds on
Ethereum. Increased volatility during this time should lead
to increasingly profitable and prevalent non-atomic arbitrage
transactions.
Figure 13 plots the cdf of gas usage and block value
of non-atomic arbitrage depending on the ETH and BTC
price volatility. Observe that the higher the BTC and ETH
price volatility in the lead-up to the block, the larger the
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
daily price volatility
Nov 2023 Mar May Jul Sep
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
daily share of blocks 
by HFT builders
HFT builder blocks
ETH price volatility
BTC price volatility
Figure 12: Daily share of blocks won by HFT builders along
with the ETH and BTC price volatility.
0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30
share of gas used by non-atomic arbitrages
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
cdf
90th pct (ETH)
90th pct (BTC)
99th pct (ETH)
99th pct (BTC)
99.9th pct (ETH)
99.9th pct (BTC)
all
(a) cdf of the share of gas used by non-atomic arbitrage
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
share of block value from non-atomic arbitrages
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
cdf
(b) cdf of the share of block value from non-atomic arbitrage
Figure 13: Cumulative distribution function (cdf) of gas
usage and block value of non-atomic arbitrage depending on
the ETH and BTC price volatility percentile, i.e., exceeding
volatility percentile indicated in the legend. The larger the
volatility the larger the proportion of gas usage and block
value stemming from non-atomic arbitrage.
share of the block’s gas usage by non-atomic arbitrage trades
(cf. Figure 13a). Overall, in less than 1% of blocks, non-
atomic arbitrage transactions make up more than 5% of
the block’s total gas usage (red line). However, for blocks
above the 99.9th percentile of BTC price volatility (yellow
line), we see that in around 40% of blocks, non-atomic
arbitrage transactions use more than 10% of block space,
i.e., gas. Note that this is in addition to already larger blocks
during times of high volatility (cf. Appendix B). Thus, the
increased prevalence of non-atomic arbitrage likely leads to
increased block competition during times of high volatility.
Importantly, this also leads to an increased base fee (i.e., the
minimum fee required for block inclusion) for consecutive
blocks as the base fee automatically increases based on the
previous block size. Further, this increase in the price for
transaction inclusion as well as the overfullness of the block
likely leads to increased congestion in the mempool. Thus,
the block space used by non-atomic arbitrage during times of
high volatility impacts all Ethereum users.
We also analyze the share of block value (i.e., priority
fees and direct transfers) that come from non-atomic arbi-
trage transactions in Figure 13b. Again we find that the share
of value from non-atomic arbitrage transactions increases
with the volatility. In fact, in around 50 % of blocks where
the ETH and BTC volatility is in the 99.9 th percentile, over
3877

===== PAGE 13 =====

80% of the block value comes from non-atomic arbitrage
transactions. Note again that not only the share of value
from non-atomic arbitrage but also the block value increases
in times of high volatility (cf. Appendix B). We further
outline that the increased value from non-atomic arbitrage
transactions in times of high volatility explains the higher
likelihood that HFT builders to win blocks during times
of high price volatility in ETH and BTC.
7. Discussion
The fees paid by non-atomic arbitrage transactions ex-
ceed current block rewards on the Ethereum PoS consensus
layer repeatedly. For instance, their value exceeds the current
consensus layer block reward by more than a factor of 10
in 15,360 blocks during our data collection period and we
further note that their value measured in fees can be seen as a
lower bound for the profit that can be extracted.
Previous works [6], [18] have demonstrated that MEV
(i.e., high-value transactions) presents a risk to the consensus
layer in PoW. To be exact, the consensus is vulnerable
to time-bandit attacks, as it can be rational for the block
proposer to fork the blockchain to exploit MEV in previous
blocks themselves. Re-orgs, required by time-bandit attacks,
have become harder in Ethereum PoS [30], but regardless
such high-value transactions present a challenge to the con-
sensus layers. For instance, an entity controlling a significant
proportion of the staking power could purposefully withhold
attestations for blocks preceding its turn as block proposer to
increase the chance of a possible re-org during its turn as
proposer being successful. Note that the biggest staking pool
currently controls around one-third of the staking power [31]
and that the losses from missed attestations are minimal.
Additionally, we show that in times of high cryptocur-
rency price volatility, we observe spikes in non-atomic arbi-
trage transactions on the Ethereum blockchain. This increase
in non-atomic arbitrage transactions leads to overfull blocks
resulting in increased waiting times and increased fees for
the remaining Ethereum users.
Centralization of Block Building. We further comment
on the centralizing effects of non-atomic arbitrage in the
block construction market. Gupta et al. [4] have shown
that HFT builders (i.e., builders with integrated non-atomic
arbitrage searchers) are more likely to win blocks during
times of high cryptocurrency price volatility for a one-month
period in early 2023. We extend these findings to the entire
history of Ethereum PoS until the end of October 2023
and highlight the relationships between builders and their
integrated searchers. Our work further establishes a direct
tie between the likelihood of these HFT builders winning the
PBS auction and the volume of non-atomic arbitrage by
their integrated searchers. As a result, during times of high
cryptocurrency price volatility block building is largely left
to two remaining HFT builders – a worrying centralization
of the block construction market.
8. Mitigation
We delve into possible mitigations to non-atomic arbi-
trage and its centralizing effects in the following.
Separating Top of Block. One possible avenue to work
against these centralizing effects of non-atomic arbitrage
suggested by Gupta et al. [4] is to separate top-of-block
extractions, i.e., non-atomic arbitrage that generally takes
place top-of-block as these swaps wish to be the first to ex-
ecute in the respective pools, and block-body extraction. By
unbundling the PBS auction as outlined, the HFT builders
specialized in non-atomic arbitrage would still dominate the
top-of-block opportunities in times of high volatility, but
would minder the effects on the rest of the block body. While
we believe that this would be a step in the right direction,
some problems remain. For one, the size of the top-of-block
would likely have to be limited as otherwise, these top-of-
block opportunities are likely to take up more than half the
block space in times of high volatility. Additionally, while
this approach would limit the centralizing effects of non-
atomic arbitrage, it would not target the security implications
(i.e., time-bandit attacks) outlined previously.
Reduction of Block Time. A further possible mitigation
is block time (i.e., time between two consecutive blocks)
reduction. This reduction would lead to less profitable non-
atomic arbitrage opportunities as the expected price change
would be reduced as we show in Section 4.1 and is also
discussed by Milionis et al. [32], [33]. If these arbitrage op-
portunities are less profitable their impact on the ecosystem
should naturally lessen. Note that the possible ramifications
of block time reduction on the consensus layer should not
be underestimated, but another possible avenue would be
to move the DEX volume to Layer 2s such as Arbitrum
and Optimism which already have much shorter block times.
9. Related Work
Maximal Extractable Value. An active line of re-
search is devoted to describing and measuring MEV on
the Ethereum blockchain. Blockchain front-running attacks
were first systematized by Eskandari et al. [34] and the
term MEV was introduced by Daian et al. [6] in an early
description of front-running on decentralized exchanges.
Our work studies a new form of MEV , i.e., non-atomic
arbitrage, that was not previously investigated in depth.
Comprehensive measurements of MEV on the Ethereum
blockchain were subsequently performed by Zhou et al. [19],
Ferreira et al. [20], and Qin et al. [18]. An in-depth study
of liquidations was presented by Qin et al. [7], whereas
Wang et al. [1] carried out a measurement study focused on
cyclic arbitrage. In this work, we perform a measurement
study of non-atomic arbitrage on DEXes, a type of MEV
prevalent in Ethereum PoS, that is not included in existing
MEV measurements.
A related line of research is devoted to preventing front-
running on the blockchain [35], [36], [37], [38], [39], [40],
[41], [42], [43], [44], [45], [46], [47], [48], [49], [50], [51],
3878

===== PAGE 14 =====

[52], [53], [54], [55], and a comprehensive overview of
these approaches is provided by Heimbach et al. [56]. Of
these approaches, only those that focus on ensuring that
transactions are included first in, first out are still applicable
to the non-atomic arbitrage we describe.
Liquidity Providers on Decentralized Exchanges.
Multiple works study the risks of liquidity providers on
DEXes. Traditionally these risks have been measured in
what is known as impermanent loss [57], [58]. More re-
cently, Milionis et al. [32], [33] introduced the concept of
loss-versus-rebalancing (LVR) to quantify the losses of DEX
liquidity providers, which can be thought of as the expected
profit of non-atomic arbitrage. Their works analytically
quantify the expected profit of non-atomic arbitrage. In
this work, on the other hand, we empirically study the
prevalence of non-atomic arbitrage on DEXes and discuss its
ramifications beyond liquidity providers.
Proposer Builder Separation. Given the immense
impact of PBS on Ethereum’s block construction market,
multiple works [11], [21], [59], [60], [61] investigate this
novel scheme. These works investigate the block value
distribution between builders and proposers, censorship re-
sistance, and highlight the increase in centralization in the
block construction market under PBS. Gupta et al. [4]
further study HFT builders, i.e., builders known to perform
non-atomic arbitrage, in the PBS scheme. Their work shows
that these builders are more likely to win blocks during
periods characterized by high cryptocurrency price volatility.
Our work, on the other hand, studies HFT builders perform-
ing non-atomic arbitrage in detail. In comparison to this
work, we take a broader view, i.e., identifying all swaps
that are likely to be non-atomic arbitrage, and analyzing the
prevalence of such trades, how they are distributed between
searchers and builders, and their impact on the ecosystem.
10. Conclusion
With this work, we uncover the prevalence, centraliz-
ing effects, and implications of non-atomic arbitrage. Our
measurement study highlights that more than one-fourth of
DEX volume is likely to be non-atomic arbitrage and that
HFT builders specialized in non-atomic arbitrage have an
advantage in the PBS auction in times of high volatility.
Besides highlighting the centralizing effects of non-atomic
arbitrage on the block construction market, we also discuss
its security implications as well as effects on the broader
Ethereum ecosystem and its users. Finally, we point at
possible mitigations and hope that the insights from our
work positively affect future developments.
References
[1] Y . Wang, Y . Chen, H. Wu, L. Zhou, S. Deng, and R. Wattenhofer,
“Cyclic Arbitrage in Decentralized Exchanges,” in Companion Pro-
ceedings of the Web Conference 2022 , 4 2022.
[2] “Total Value Locked,” https://defillama.com/chains.
[3] “MEV-Boost Dashboard,” https://mevboost.pics/.
[4] T. Gupta, M. M. Pai, and M. Resnick, “The centralizing effects of
private order flow on proposer-builder separation,” in 5th Conference
on Advances in Financial Technologies , 10 2023.
[5] “Proposer-Builder Separation,” https://ethereum.org/roadmap/pbs/.
[6] P. Daian, S. Goldfeder, T. Kell, Y . Li, X. Zhao, I. Bentov, L. Breiden-
bach, and A. Juels, “Flash boys 2.0: Frontrunning in decentralized
exchanges, miner extractable value, and consensus instability,” in
2020 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) , 5 2020.
[7] K. Qin, L. Zhou, P. Gamito, P. Jovanovic, and A. Gervais, “An em-
pirical study of defi liquidations: incentives, risks, and instabilities,” in
Proceedings of the 21st ACM Internet Measurement Conference , 11
2021.
[8] “DefiLlama,” https://defillama.com/protocols/dexes/Ethereum.
[9] “Zeromev,” https://zeromev.org/.
[10] Mempool Guru, “Mempool Guru,” https://mempool.guru/, 2023.
[11] S. Yang, F. Zhang, K. Huang, X. Chen, Y . Yang, and F. Zhu,
“SoK: MEV Countermeasures: Theory and Practice,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2212.05111, 2023.
[12] Binance, “Historical Market Data,” https://www.binance.com/en/
landing/data, 2023.
[13] “Today’s cryptocurrency prices by market cap,” 2023. [Online].
Available: https://coinmarketcap.com/
[14] H. Adams, N. Zinsmeister, and D. Robinson, “Uniswap v2 core,”
2020.
[15] H. Adams, N. Zinsmeister, M. Salem, R. Keefer, and D. Robinson,
“Uniswap v3 core,” 2021.
[16] Sushiswap, “Be a Crypto Chef with Sushi,” https://docs.sushi.com/
pdf/whitepaper.pdf, 2023.
[17] “Non-atomic arbitrage data and code,” 2023. [Online].
Available: https://github.com/liobaheimbach/Non-Atomic-Arbitrage-
in-Decentralized-Finance
[18] K. Qin, L. Zhou, and A. Gervais, “Quantifying blockchain extractable
value: How dark is the forest?” in 2022 IEEE Symposium on Security
and Privacy (SP) . IEEE, 5 2022.
[19] L. Zhou, K. Qin, C. F. Torres, D. V . Le, and A. Gervais, “High-
Frequency Trading on Decentralized On-Chain Exchanges,” in 2021
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) , 5 2021.
[20] C. F. Torres, R. Camino, and R. State, “Frontrunner Jones and the
Raiders of the Dark Forest: An Empirical Study of Frontrunning on
the Ethereum Blockchain,” in 30th USENIX Security Symposium , 8
2021.
[21] L. Heimbach, L. Kiffer, C. Ferreira Torres, and R. Wattenhofer,
“Ethereum’s Proposer-Builder Separation: Promises and Realities,”
in 2023 ACM Internet Measurement Conference (IMC), Montreal,
QC, Canada, Oct. 2023.
[22] “DefiLlama API,” https://defillama.com/docs/api.
[23] “Jump Etherscan,” https://etherscan.io/address/
0x9507c04b10486547584c37bcbd931b2a4fee9a41, 2023.
[24] Investopedia, “The Collapse of FTX: What Went Wrong With the
Crypto Exchange?” https://www.investopedia.com/what-went-wrong-
with-ftx-6828447, 2023.
[25] Cointelegraph, “TUSDC depegs as Circle confirms $3.3B stuck with
Silicon Valley Bank,” https://cointelegraph.com/news/usdc-depegs-
as-circle-confirms-3-3b-stuck-with-silicon-valley-bank, 2023.
[26] Blockworks, “The Investor’s Guide to Crypto Correlation,” https://
blockworks.co/news/the-investors-guide-to-crypto-correlation, 2023.
[27] K. Q. Nguyen, “The correlation between the stock market
and bitcoin during covid-19 and other uncertainty periods,” Finance
Research Letters , vol. 46, 2022. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1544612321003238
3879

===== PAGE 15 =====

[28] “Meeting calendars, statements, and minutes (2018-2024),” https://
www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.html, 2023.
[29] “How the fed impacts stocks, crypto and other investments,”
https://www.bankrate.com/investing/federal-reserve-impact-on-
stocks-crypto-other-investments/#crypto, 2023.
[30] G. Konstantopoulos and V . Buterin, “Ethereum Reorgs Af-
ter The Merge,” https://www.paradigm.xyz/2021/07/ethereum-reorgs-
after-the-merge, 2021.
[31] D. Grandjean, L. Heimbach, and R. Wattenhofer, “Ethereum Proof-of-
Stake Consensus Layer: Participation and Decentralization,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2306.10777, 2023.
[32] J. Milionis, C. C. Moallemi, T. Roughgarden, and A. L. Zhang,
“Automated Market Making and Loss-Versus-Rebalancing,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2208.06046, 2022.
[33] J. Milionis, C. C. Moallemi, and T. Roughgarden, “Automated Market
Making and Arbitrage Profits in the Presence of Fees,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.14604, 2023.
[34] S. Eskandari, S. Moosavi, and J. Clark, “SoK: Transparent Dishon-
esty: Front-Running Attacks on Blockchain,” in Financial Cryptogra-
phy and Data Security , vol. 11599, 2020.
[35] I. Bentov, Y . Ji, F. Zhang, L. Breidenbach, P. Daian, and A. Juels,
“Tesseract: Real-time cryptocurrency exchange using trusted hard-
ware,” in Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conference on
Computer and Communications Security , ser. CCS ’19, 2019.
[36] C. Stathakopoulou, S. Rüsch, M. Brandenburger, and M. Vukoli ´c,
“Adding Fairness to Order: Preventing Front-Running Attacks in BFT
Protocols using TEEs,” in 2021 40th International Symposium on
Reliable Distributed Systems (SRDS) , 2021.
[37] M. Kelkar, F. Zhang, S. Goldfeder, and A. Juels, “Order-Fairness
for Byzantine Consensus,” in Annual International Cryptology Con-
ference, 2020.
[38] L. Baird, “The Swirlds Hashgraph Consensus Algorithm: Fair, Fast,
Byzantine Fault Tolerance,” Swirlds Tech Reports SWIRLDS-TR-
2016-01, Tech. Rep, 2016.
[39] K. Kursawe, “Wendy, the Good Little Fairness Widget: Achieving
Order Fairness for Blockchains,” in 2nd ACM Conference on Ad-
vances in Financial Technologies , 2020.
[40] Y . Zhang, S. Setty, Q. Chen, L. Zhou, and L. Alvisi, “Byzan-
tine Ordered Consensus Without Byzantine Oligarchy,” in 14th
{USENIX} Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implemen-
tation ( {OSDI} 20), 2020.
[41] M. Kelkar, S. Deb, and S. Kannan, “Order-Fair Consensus in the
Permissionless Setting,” IACR Cryptol. ePrint Arch. , 2021.
[42] M. Kelkar, S. Deb, S. Long, A. Juels, and S. Kannan, “Themis: Fast,
Strong Order-Fairness in Byzantine Consensus,” Cryptology ePrint
Archive, Report 2021/1465, 2021.
[43] C. Cachin, J. Mi ´ci´c, and N. Steinhauer, “Quick Order Fairness,” in
Financial Cryptography and Data Security (FC), Grenada , 2022.
[44] M. K. Reiter and K. P. Birman, “How to Securely Replicate Ser-
vices,” ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems
(TOPLAS), vol. 16, no. 3, 1994.
[45] A. Miller, Y . Xia, K. Croman, E. Shi, and D. Song, “The Honey
Badger of BFT Protocols,” ser. CCS ’16, 2016.
[46] A. Asayag, G. Cohen, I. Grayevsky, M. Leshkowitz, O. Rottenstreich,
R. Tamari, and D. Yakira, “A Fair Consensus Protocol for Transaction
Ordering,” in 2018 IEEE 26th International Conference on Network
Protocols (ICNP), 2018.
[47] A. Orda and O. Rottenstreich, “Enforcing Fairness in Blockchain
Transaction Ordering,” Peer-to-peer Networking and Applications ,
vol. 14, no. 6, 2021.
[48] H. Zhang, L.-H. Merino, V . Estrada-Galinanes, and B. Ford, “Flash
freezing flash boys: Countering blockchain front-running,” in 2022
IEEE 42nd International Conference on Distributed Computing Sys-
tems Workshops (ICDCSW), 2022.
[49] A. Constantinescu, D. Ghinea, L. Heimbach, Z. Wang, and R. Wat-
tenhofer, “A Fair and Resilient Decentralized Clock Network for
Transaction Ordering,” in27th International Conference on Principles
of Distributed Systems (OPODIS), Tokyo, Japan , Dec. 2023.
[50] P. Momeni, S. Gorbunov, and B. Zhang, “Fairblock: Preventing
Blockchain Front-Running with Minimal Overheads,” in Security and
Privacy in Communication Networks: 18th EAI International Confer-
ence, SecureComm 2022, Virtual Event, October 2022, Proceedings ,
2023.
[51] A. Tatabitovska, O. Ersoy, and Z. Erkin, “Mitigation of Transaction
Manipulation Attacks in UniSwap,” 2021.
[52] L. Breidenbach, P. Daian, F. Tramèr, and A. Juels, “Enter the Hy-
dra: Towards Principled Bug Bounties and Exploit-Resistant Smart
Contracts,” in 27th USENIX Security Symposium , 2018.
[53] Y . Doweck and I. Eyal, “Multi-Party Timed Commitments,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2005.04883, 2020.
[54] L. Heimbach and R. Wattenhofer, “Eliminating Sandwich Attacks
with the Help of Game Theory,” in ACM Asia Conference on Com-
puter and Communications Security (ASIA CCS), Nagasaki, Japan ,
Jun. 2022.
[55] L. Zhou, K. Qin, and A. Gervais, “A2MM: Mitigating Frontrunning,
Transaction Reordering and Consensus Instability in Decentralized
Exchanges,” 2021.
[56] L. Heimbach and R. Wattenhofer, “SoK: Preventing Transaction
Reordering Manipulations in Decentralized Finance,” in 4th ACM
Conference on Advances in Financial Technologies (AFT), Cam-
bridge, MA, USA , Sep. 2022.
[57] L. Heimbach, Y . Wang, and R. Wattenhofer, “Behavior of Liquidity
Providers in Decentralized Exchanges,” in2021 Crypto Valley Confer-
ence on Blockchain Technology (CVCBT), Rotkreuz, Switzerland, Oct.
2021.
[58] L. Heimbach, E. Schertenleib, and R. Wattenhofer, “Risks and Re-
turns of Uniswap V3 Liquidity Providers,” in 4th ACM Conference
on Advances in Financial Technologies (AFT), Cambridge, MA, USA,
Sep. 2022.
[59] A. Wahrstätter, J. Ernstberger, A. Yaish, L. Zhou, K. Qin,
T. Tsuchiya, S. Steinhorst, D. Svetinovic, N. Christin, M. Barczen-
tewicz, and A. Gervais, “Blockchain Censorship,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.18545, 2023.
[60] A. Wahrstätter, L. Zhou, K. Qin, D. Svetinovic, and A. Gervais, “Time
to Bribe: Measuring Block Construction Market,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.16468, 2023.
[61] C. Schwarz-Schilling, F. Saleh, T. Thiery, J. Pan, N. Shah, and
B. Monnot, “Time is Money: Strategic Timing Games in Proof-of-
Stake Protocols,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.09032 , 2023.
Appendix A.
HFT Builders
A.1. Searcher - Builder Ties
In the following, we provide an in-depth analysis of the
ties between HFT builders and integrated searchers.
In Figure 14 we plot the daily share of blocks on the
Ethereum network they built against the daily share of the
non-atomic arbitrage volume executed by their integrated
searchers for each HFT builder. Interestingly, both beaver-
build (cf. Figure 14a) and rsyncbuilder (cf. Figure 14b)
were active as searchers, before their builders started to
be active. For beaverbuild the delay is around one and a half
months whereas it is around two months for rsyncbuilder.
3880

===== PAGE 16 =====

Nov 2023 Mar May Jul Sep
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
share of non-atomic arb. volume
beaversearcher1
beaversearcher2
beaverbuild
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
share of blocks
(a) beaverbuild
Nov 2023 Mar May Jul Sep
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
share of non-atomic arb. volume
rsyncsearcher1
rsyncsearcher2
rsyncsearcher3
rsyncbuilder
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
share of blocks
(b) rsyncbuilder
Nov 2023 Mar May Jul Sep
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
share of non-atomic arb. volume
mantasearcher mantabuilder
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
share of blocks
(c) mantabuilder
Nov 2023 Mar May Jul Sep
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
share of non-atomic arb. volume
builder1searcher builder1
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
share of blocks
(d) builder1
Figure 14: We plot the daily share of the non-atomic ar-
bitrage volume of the searchers and the share of blocks
built by the builder.
Additionally, there was a period where the rsyncbuilder
was operating from May to September 2023 but we could
beaverbuild rsyncbuilder builder1 mantabuilder
sandwich attacks per block 0.041 0.043 0.000 0.001
cyclic arbitrage per block 0.008 0.006 0.003 0.001
TABLE 4: Sandwich attack and cyclic arbitrage transactions
included in blocks by the four builders identified to have
integrated non-atomic arbitrage searchers.
associate no searcher with rsyncbuilder during that time
window. However, during times when at least one integrated
searcher and the builders were operating we find that there
is a correlation between the share of non-atomic arbitrage
volume swapped by the integrated searchers and the share
of blocks won by the respective builders. We find that
the correlation between the share of non-atomic arbitrage
volume by beaversearcher1 and beaversearcher2 and the
share of block won by beaverbuild is 0.244 with a p-value of
1.83 · 10−6 – indicating very high statistical significance
even though the correlation is relatively small. During the
operation of rsynsearcher2, the correlation between the share
of non-atomic arbitrage volume by rsyncseracher2 and the
share of block won by rsyncbuilder is 0.805 with a p-value
of 5.68·10−18, whereas it correlation is 0.502 with a p-value
of 4.50 · 10−6 during lifetime of rsyncseacher3.
Turing to mantabuilder (cf. Figure 14c) and builder1 (cf.
Figure 14d), we observe for both of them the searcher and
builder are operating for the same period. During that time
the correlation between the share of volume by the searcher
and the share of blocks won by the builder is higher than 0.7.
We further note that interestingly, mantabuilder comes into
operation with its searcher just as builder1 closes operation.
To explain the lower correlation between the market
shares of beaverbuild and its searchers in comparison to the
other HFT builders, we take a look at the number of sand-
wich attacks and cyclic arbitrage transactions these builders
include in their blocks. In Table 4 find that beaverbuild
and rsyncbuilder, where we also saw a lower correlation
during the operation of rsyncseacher3, are much more likely
to include sandwich attacks and cyclic arbitrage in their
blocks, than builder1 and mantabuilder. Thus, we believe
that the block value of beaverbuild and rsyncbuilder blocks
also come from other types of MEV . Therefore, it is not only
the non-atomic arbitrage volume that determines the value of
their blocks even though there is a significant correlation.
A.2. Beaverbuild
Next, we further cement the relationship between beaver-
build and its integrated searchers by highlighting that
beaverbuild was likely subsidizing its searchers for around
a month. Figure 15 shows beaverbuild’s daily profit (i.e.,
the difference between priority fees and direct transfers
from transactions and the payment to the proposer) and we
observe that it is consistently negative between 3 February
and 14 March 2023 (from block 16,544,549 to 16,822,491).
Thus, during this time beaverbuild was offering proposers
a higher bid than what transactions in the blocks have paid in
fees. For example, in block 16,627,349 these fees amounted
to 56.18 ETH even though the total amount received in fees
3881

===== PAGE 17 =====

was 0.059 ETH. Hence, it is very likely that beaverbuild has
another source of income, whereby they can afford to pay
the proposers such large fees. We note that these suspicious
negative profits were also identified by Heimbach et al. [21],
but no further explanation was given.
Nov 2023 Mar May Jul Sep
0
200
400
daily builder profit [ETH]
beaverbuild rest
Figure 15: Daily builder profit (i.e., priority fees and coin-
base transfers minus the payment to the proposer) of beaver-
build and the remaining builders. Notice that for a month the
beaverbuild profit was negative.
We find that the beaverbuild was in all likelihood sub-
sidizing its own builder. In the following, we check whether
the large fees could be explained by the prevalence of these
searchers within blocks that offer a higher bid. For this,
we look at all blocks that were built by beaverbuild during
this time, and which blocks offered larger bids than what
they earned in transaction fees.
During this time beaverbuild built 48,606 blocks, with
35,584 (73.2%) blocks offering the proposer a value larger
than the fee that they received. We find that 34,682 blocks
(around 97.46% of blocks) had at least one transaction from
either beaversearcher1 or beaversearcher2. Furthermore, in
the remaining 13,022 blocks only 2,802 blocks (around
21.5%) had at least one transaction from either searcher.
During this time beaverbuild received a total of 1,941.1 ETH
in fees but paid proposers 6,620.94 ETH. This corresponds
to a loss of over 4,679.84 ETH. This is further evidence of
integrated builder searchers and points to the fact that these
searchers are run by beaverbuild themselves. Furthermore,
this makes our claim stronger that builders themselves profit
from non-atomic arbitrage since beaverbuild had a loss of
over 3,195.76 ETH on-chain. For all the non-beaverbuild
blocks over this time, we find that out of 211,960 only
17,378 blocks (7.6%) offer bids to proposers that are larger
than what they received in fees from transactions. There
was a total of 31,954.07 ETH paid in fees by transactions,
and 28,245.00 ETH being paid to proposers.
Appendix B.
Effects of Volatility
We analyze the effects of high cryptocurrency price
volatility on the block sizes and block value (i.e., priority
fees and direct transfers) in Figure 16. First, we note blocks
with high cryptocurrency price volatility tend to be fuller
as we see in Figure 16a. Note that in Ethereum the target
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
block size [gas] ×107
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
cdf
90th pct (ETH)
90th pct (BTC)
99th pct (ETH)
99th pct (BTC)
99.9th pct (ETH)
99.9th pct (BTC)
all
(a) cdf of the block size
10 3
 10 2
 10 1
 100 101 102 103
block value [ETH]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
cdf
(b) cdf of block value
Figure 16: Cumulative distribution function (cdf) of gas
usage and block value depending on the ETH and BTC
price volatility percentile, i.e., exceeding volatility percentile
indicated in the legend.
size for a block is 1.5 · 107, while the maximum block size
is 3 · 107. For blocks in the 99.9 th percentile in terms of
price volatility only around 20% of them are at target size
or smaller, whereas around 50% of overall blocks are no
larger than target size.
Additionally, we find that blocks built during periods
of high volatility are more valuable (cf. Figure 16b). For
instance for blocks in the 99.9 th percentile in terms of price
volatility, more than half of them are at least worth 1 ETH, in
comparison to less than 1% overall.
Appendix C.
MEV
In Figure 17, we provide a comparison between non-
atomic arbitrage and well-studied types of MEV , i.e., sand-
wich attacks, cyclic arbitrage, and liquidations. First, we
compare the daily number of occurrences of each type
of MEV in Figure 17a. Note that for sandwich attacks,
which consist of a frontrunning transaction, the victim’s
transaction, and a backrunning transaction, we count this
set of transactions as a single transaction. Non-atomic ar-
bitrage and sandwich attacks dominate MEV in terms of
a number of occurrences. Additionally, in the first part of
our data collection window, the number of occurrences of
non-atomic arbitrage exceeds that of sandwich attacks. Then
around May 2023, it switches and there are more sandwich
3882

===== PAGE 18 =====

Nov 2023 Mar May Jul Sep
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
daily number of occurences ×104
non-atomic arbitrage
sandwich attacks
cyclic arbitrage
liquidations
(a) Daily number of occurrences of non-atomic arbitrage in com-
parison to sandwich attacks, cyclic arbitrage and liquidations.
Nov 2023 Mar May Jul Sep
0
250
500
750
1.0K
1.2K
1.5K
daily value [ETH] 
non-atomic arbitrage
sandwich attacks
cyclic arbitrage
liquidations
(b) Daily value of of non-atomic arbitrage in comparison to
sandwich attacks, cyclic arbitrage and liquidations.
Figure 17: Comparison between non-atomic arbitrage and
well-studied types of MEV , i.e., sandwich attacks, cyclic
arbitrage, and liquidations.
attacks than occurrences of non-atomic arbitrage. Notably,
this coincides with jaredfromsubway.eth, i.e., a sandwich
attack bot, entering the MEV market. By July 2023, the
occurrences of non-atomic arbitrage and sandwich attacks
are quite similar and continue to be so until the end of
our data collection window.
We further compare the value, i.e., the fees paid to the
proposer/builder through priority fees and coinbase trans-
fers, of the four types of MEV (cf. Figure 17b). Again
we notice that non-atomic arbitrage and sandwich attacks
are responsible for the majority of the value. To put it in
numbers, the average daily non-atomic arbitrage value is
112 ETH, whereas it is 161 ETH for sandwich attacks,
26 ETH for cyclic arbitrage, and 5 ETH for liquidations.
We again see an increase in the value of sandwich attacks,
as jaredfromsubway.eth enters the MEV market around
May 2023, which then declines again. Additionally, we ob-
serve that on days with high cryptocurrency price volatility,
such as the FTX collapse in November 2022 or the USDC
depeg in March 2023, we observe spikes in all types of
MEV .
To conclude, the scale of non-atomic arbitrage in terms
of number of occurrences and in terms of value is compara-
ble to that of sandwich attacks and significantly exceeds
that of cyclic arbitrage and liquidations.
Appendix D.
Heuristics
To further ensure the validity of our heuristics, we
investigate the portion of transactions we flag as non-
atomic arbitrages in Table 5 for each of the largest eleven
searchers that we identified. The previously identified non-
atomic arbitrage searchers that we studied to develop these
heuristics are included for completeness and marked in bold.
These searchers were chosen as Gupta et al. [4] previously
showed that these searchers were likely involved in CEX-
DEX arbitrages. We further note that these searchers are
implemented as smart contracts and are likely to specialize
in one profitable type of transaction. Thus, if we identify
the majority of a searcher’s transactions as non-atomic
arbitrage it is very likely that this classification is accurate.
Turning to Table 5, we notice that for all newly identified
searcher except one (i.e., seacher2), more than 80% of their
transactions fulfill all our five heuristics. This leads us to
conclude that these searchers are in fact performing non-
atomic arbitrage. We believe that we are more likely to
undercount non-atomic arbitrage as the remaining swaps
from these wallets are also likely to be (failed) non-atomic
arbitrage swaps (i.e., they tend to be simple transfers and
the first in the pool). However, we do not include these
in our analysis to avoid overstating the volume of non-
atomic arbitrage. Finally, we note that for searcher2 our
heuristics only apply to 17% of swaps on DEXes. While
the swaps we identify as non-atomic arbitrage appear to be
simple swaps, this searcher also appears to perform other
types of high-value transactions given that less than half
of its swaps classify as simple.
total swaps simple private first swap in pool top tokens coinbase transfer priority fee coinbase transfer or priority fee all
heuristic 1 heuristic 2 heuristic 4 heuristic 5 heuristic 3
beaversearchers 1,188,696 0.982 0.815 0.826 0.822 0.608 0.313 0.917 0.580
rsyncsearchers 346,570 1.000 0.997 0.924 0.931 0.059 0.895 0.954 0.884
jumpsearcher 232,226 1.000 0.956 0.986 0.989 0.000 1.000 1.000 0.943
builder1searcher 86,709 0.999 0.881 0.895 0.926 0.853 0.138 0.989 0.805
mantasearcher 60,813 0.999 0.941 0.921 0.955 0.940 0.057 0.977 0.879
searcher1 57,824 0.978 0.996 0.990 0.993 0.000 1.000 1.000 0.963
searcher2 46,878 0.441 0.999 0.700 0.479 0.075 0.424 0.499 0.174
searcher3 16,201 1.000 0.998 0.989 1.000 1.000 0.000 1.000 0.988
overall 77,019,583 0.651 0.317 0.280 0.151 0.036 0.568 0.601 0.028
TABLE 5: Proportion of transactions from large non-atomic arbitrageurs our five heuristics apply to individually and
together in comparison to all swaps on DEXes. The previously identified integrated searchers are highlighted in bold.
3883

===== PAGE 19 =====

Appendix E.
Meta-Review
The following meta-review was prepared by the program
committee for the 2024 IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy (S&P) as part of the review process as detailed in the
call for papers.
E.1. Summary
This paper extends the study of Maximal Extractable
Value (MEV) within Ethereum decentralized exchanges
(DEXs) to non-atomic arbitrage, where only one side of the
arbitrage transaction occurs on the blockchain. The authors
develop a set of heuristics that they use to conclude that:
• non-atomic arbitrage transactions increase substantially
during periods of high price volatility,
• a small number of entities are responsible for the
majority of the activity, and
• non-atomic arbitrage may account for 25% of the total
volume of the five largest DEXs on Ethereum.
E.2. Scientific Contributions
• Independent Confirmation of Important Results with
Limited Prior Research
• Addresses a Long-Known Issue
• Provides a Valuable Step Forward in an Established
Field
E.3. Reasons for Acceptance
1) The paper confirms the important result with limited
prior work that arbitrage including off-chain exchanges
plays a significant role in the trading on DEXs, particu-
larly in periods of high price volatility.
2) The paper provides methods for understanding and
further analyzing non-atomic arbitrage.
3884