

===== PAGE 1 =====

NONCONFIDENTIAL // EXTERNAL
Working Paper | SRA 23-02 | First Version: August 2023 | This Version: June 2025
Runs and Flights to Safety: Are Stablecoins
the New Money Market Funds?
Kenechukwu Anadu, Pablo D. Azar, Marco Cipriani, Thomas M. Eisenbach,
Catherine Huang, Mattia Landoni, Gabriele La Spada, Marco Macchiavelli,
Antoine Malfroy-Camine, and J. Christina Wang

Supervisory Research and Analysis Unit

===== PAGE 2 =====

NONCONFIDENTIAL // EXTERNAL




Supervisory Research and Analysis (SRA) Working Papers present
economic, financial and policy-related research conducted by staff in the
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston’s Supervisory Research and Analysis Unit.
SRA Working Papers can be downloaded without charge at:
http://www.bostonfed.org/publications/sra/

The views expressed in this paper are those of the author and do not
necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston or the
Federal Reserve System.

===== PAGE 3 =====

Runs and Flights to Safety:
Are Stablecoins the New Money Market Funds?∗
Kenechukwu Anadu1, Pablo D. Azar2, Marco Cipriani2, Thomas M. Eisenbach2,
Catherine Huang3, Mattia Landoni1, Gabriele La Spada2, Marco Macchiavelli4,
Antoine Malfroy-Camine1, and J. Christina Wang1
1Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
2Federal Reserve Bank of New York
3Harvard Business School
4Isenberg School of Management
First version: August 2023
This version: June 2025
Abstract
Similar to the more traditional money market funds (MMFs), stablecoins aim to provide
investors with safe, money-like assets. We investigate similarities and differences between
thesetwoinvestmentproducts.Ourkeyfindingisthat,likeMMFs,stablecoinsalsosufferfrom
“flight-to-safety” dynamics. This is manifested in net flows from riskier to safer stablecoins
on days of crypto-market stress. The same flight-to-safety dynamics also characterized flows
during stablecoin runs, as exemplified by the two most severe episodes in 2022 and 2023.
Furthermore, as flight-to-safety flows occur within MMF families, stablecoin flows tend to
occur within blockchains.
JEL classification:G10, G20, G23.
Keywords: Stablecoins, Money Market Mutual Funds, Financial Stability, Crypto Assets, Runs,
Liquidity Transformation.
∗We thank for helpful comments and suggestions Anders Brownworth, Mark Dickerson, Edward Dumas,
Jessica Dwyer, Siobhan Sanders, Larry Wall, and conference and seminar participants at 2023 Economics
of Payments XII and 2024 Conference on the Financial Stability Implications of Stablecoins. The views
expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Re-
serve Bank of Boston, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, or the Federal Reserve System. Emails:
Ken.Anadu@bos.frb.org, Pablo.Azar@ny.frb.org, Marco.Cipriani@ny.frb.org, Thomas.Eisenbach@ny.frb.org,
catherinehuang1@g.harvard.edu, Mattia.Landoni@bos.frb.org, Gabriele.LaSpada@ny.frb.org, mmacchi-
avelli@isenberg.umass.edu, Antoine.Malfroy-Camine@bos.frb.org, and Christina.Wang@bos.frb.org.

===== PAGE 4 =====

1 Introduction
Stablecoinsarecryptoassetsthatseektomaintainastableprice(usually$1)suchthattheycanserve
as a form of money—a store of value and medium of exchange (e.g., Gorton and Zhang, 2021).1
Stablecoin market capitalization has grown exponentially over the past ten years. While they were
initially used mainly in the trading of other, more speculative crypto assets, their proponents have
argued for a potentially much wider adoption of stablecoins as a form of money, particularly in
cross-border payments and emerging market economies (e.g., Carter et al., 2024). However, in
contrasttotraditionalinstrumentsthatfunctionasmoney,suchasbankdepositsandmoneymarket
fund shares, stablecoins are largely unregulated. In fact, it is still actively debated whether they
should be regulated and how (e.g., Jasperse and Hammer, 2024).
Inthispaper,westudythepropertiesofstablecoinsincomparisontomoney-marketmutualfunds
(MMFs),whichareacomparablefinancialvehiclewithwell-establishedmoney-likepropertiesand
a history of regulation of varying efficacy (Financial Stability Board, 2024). We show empirically
thatstablecoinsshareimportant(in)stabilitypropertieswithMMFs,namely,strongflight-to-safety
dynamics—defined as redemptions from entities perceived as riskier accompanied by inflows into
those perceived as safer. Given this similarity, the challenges regulators have faced with MMFs
foreshadow similar challenges with stablecoins.
Stablecoins and MMFs both engage in liquidity and risk transformation to provide money-like
assets to investors. They issue liabilities with a stable nominal value, but the collateral backing
these claims is less liquid and can fluctuate in value.2 This liquidity transformation makes both
stablecoins and MMFs vulnerable to runs, similar to banks with uninsured depositors (Rosengren,
2021;Azaretal.,2022;FederalReserveBoard,2022). 3 Wedefinearunasawaveofredemptions,
1Throughout this paper, we use the termcrypto assets to refer to assets held on a blockchain. A blockchain is a
distributed computer system that uses cryptography to enable multiple parties to agree on who owns which assets at
any given time (Nakamoto, 2008).
2Algorithmic stablecoins are a special case in which price stability is not ensured by holding collateral, but rather
by an algorithmic mechanism that uses arbitrage to balance demand and supply. The liquidity of these stablecoins,
rather than depending on collateral liquidity, depends on investor confidence in the pegging algorithm. See Section 2
and Appendix 2.1.3.
3There are, of course, several differences between MMFs and stablecoins; for example, MMFs are governed by
the US Securities and Exchange Commission under Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act of 1940, which sets
1

===== PAGE 5 =====

often sparked by a loss of confidence in the value of an entity’s assets, and exacerbated by a
first-mover advantage.4 It is this vulnerability to runs that fuels the flight-to-safety behavior we
observe.
Another similarity between MMFs and stablecoins is that, within each category, there is great
heterogeneity in the amount of risk taken by individual funds and coins, respectively. In fact,
stablecoins exhibit an even wider range of risk profiles than MMFs. Some stablecoins report that
theyarebackedbysafeassets,suchascashandUSTreasuries,whosevaluesremainstableoreven
increase during times of stress. Others, instead, are reportedly backed by riskier collateral, such as
corporatebondsorevenothercryptoassets.Asthecollateralbackingsomestablecoinslosesvalue,
they are likely to lose their peg, potentially triggering a run. A third group of stablecoins maintain
theirpegsthroughalgorithmsaimedatmatchingsupplyanddemand;ifinvestors’beliefsaboutthe
effectiveness of these algorithms deteriorate, such stablecoins may also suffer runs.
The potential for runs on stablecoins and the stablecoin runs that did occur in 2022 and 2023
haveattractedsubstantialtheoreticalinterest.Severalrecentworksexaminethedriversofstablecoin
instability and propose self-governance or regulatory solutions to make stablecoins more stable.5
However,whilethevariousrunssufferedbyMMFsarewell-documentedempirically(seereferences
below),withafewexceptions,thereisadearthofempiricalevidenceontherunsandflight-to-safety
dynamics within the stablecoin ecosystem.6
minimum portfolio liquidity and maturity standards, among other restrictions, whereas stablecoins are not subject to
this regulation. In Section 2, we discuss the institutional differences and similarities between stablecoins and MMFs
in detail. Also, while this paper focuses on MMFs and stablecoins, there are other collective investment vehicles with
similar structural vulnerabilities, such as private liquidity funds and short-term investment funds (Federal Reserve
Board, 2022).
4This definition is broad enough to encompass episodes as diverse as the Reserve Primary Fund MMF run
(Kacperczyk and Schnabl, 2013), the TerraUSD stablecoin run (Liu et al., 2023), and the Silicon Valley Bank run
(Drechsler et al., 2024).
5See, for instance, Arner, Auer and Frost (2020), Bertsch (2023), d’Avernas, Maurin and Vandeweyer (2022),
Gorton et al. (2022a), and Li and Mayer (2022).
6Ma, Zeng and Zhang (2023) structurally estimate the run risk of two major stablecoins. Hoang and Baur (2021)
quantifythevolatilityofstablecoinprices.Oefele,BaurandSmales(2024)showssuggestiveevidenceofcapitalflight
from riskier to safer stablecoins around the failure of Silicon Valley Bank (SVB) in 2023. Other papers focus on
individual runs (Adams and Ibert, 2022; Uhlig, 2022; Liu, Makarov and Schoar, 2023) or examine historical evidence
from episodes of runs on financial assets that bear some resemblance to modern stablecoins (Frost, Shin and Wierts,
2020; Gorton, Ross and Ross, 2022b).
2

===== PAGE 6 =====

We first provide systematic empirical evidence of flight-to-safety dynamics in stablecoins. To
this end, we study the response of stablecoin investors to stress events in the broad crypto market
associatedwithlargedeclinesinthepriceofBitcoin.Wefindthat,duringtheseepisodes,investors
run from riskier stablecoins to safer ones, a flight-to-safety dynamic similar to what we observe in
MMFs in times of stress.7
Next, we show that these flight-to-safety dynamics also occur during well-known stablecoin
runs. The most significant episode so far was the May 2022 collapse of TerraUSD (UST), an
algorithmic stablecoin and the fourth-largest at the time. We show that, following a classic flight-
to-safety dynamic, this run had negative spillover effects on other algorithmic stablecoins and
stablecoins backed by risky assets, whereas those backed by relatively safer assets experienced net
inflows.
AnotherstablecoinrunoccurredinMarch2023,triggeredbythefailureofSiliconValleyBank
(SVB). USD Coin (USDC), the second-largest stablecoin at the time, held deposits at SVB. As in
the May 2022 run, crypto investors responded quickly to the news by selling or redeeming their
USDC tokens. The run spilled over to Dai and Frax, both of which were partially collateralized
by USDC. We again show that investor reactions followed a flight-to-safety pattern. However, the
flows inverted relative to the May 2022 run because of the different source of risk: investors fled
fromtheformerlysaferUSDCtootherstablecoinsbasedoutsidetheUnitedStatesandnotexposed
to SVB, including the formerly riskier USDT.
Overall, these run and flight-to-safety dynamics observed in the stablecoin market are similar
to those observed in the MMF industry. During a stress event, MMF investors identify a driver
of risk and run away from MMFs that are more exposed to such risk toward relatively safer
MMFs or similar vehicles. Indeed, during the Global Financial Crisis in 2008, MMF investors
ran from prime funds with larger exposures to Lehman Brothers and asset-backed commercial
paper(McCabe,2010;KacperczykandSchnabl,2013;Duygan-Bumpetal.,2013),andtowardthe
7Our characterization of a stablecoin as “safe” or “risky” is based on the composition of its underlying collateral
(also known as “reserves”)as reported by the stablecoin issuer. Reporting quality, however, varies across stablecoin
issuers, because there is no standardized or regulatory reporting requirement.
3

===== PAGE 7 =====

safety of government funds. During the European debt crisis in 2011, investors ran on funds with
exposure to European banks (Chernenko and Sunderam, 2014; Ivashina, Scharfstein and Stein,
2015; Gallagher et al., 2020). At the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, funds closer to
regulatoryliquidityconstraintsexperiencedheavieroutflows(CiprianiandLaSpada,2020;Lietal.,
2021). In all these episodes, prime MMFs were exposed to the source of risk and thus suffered
outflows, while government MMFs were deemed safer and experienced contemporaneous inflows.
Importantly, contagion is a feature of both stablecoin and MMF runs; for instance, Cipriani and
La Spada (2020) document information contagion from institutional to retail prime MMFs during
the 2020 run.
An additional parallel between MMF and stablecoin investors relates to the pattern of flows.
Forlargerandrelativelylessriskyblockchains,suchasEthereumandBinanceSmartChain,where
90 percent of all stablecoins are traded, we show that flows from riskier to safer stablecoins tend
to occur within the same blockchain. This is similar to the pattern of flight-to-safety flows across
MMFs, which tend to occur within the same fund complex (Cipriani and La Spada 2020, 2021).
Bycontrast,smallerandriskierblockchains—whichrepresentlessthan10percentofallstablecoin
circulation—exhibitadifferentpattern.Withintheseblockchains,outflowsfromriskierstablecoins
arecorrelatedwithoutflowsfromrelativelylessriskystablecoins;thissuggeststhatinvestorsdeem
the blockchains themselves as risky overall and hence depart them for relatively safer (larger)
blockchains.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background information on
stablecoinsandMMFs,andbrieflydiscussesflight-to-safetydynamics.Section3describesthedata.
Section 4 presents our empirical analysis of stablecoin flow dynamics, and Section 5 concludes.
Appendix A presents statistics on the largest stablecoins in the industry and describes how they
maintain their peg. Appendix B provides additional empirical results supporting our thesis.
4

===== PAGE 8 =====

Figure 1: Stablecoin industry circulation from January 2017 to April 2023
Alt text: Time series chart showing total stablecoin circulation in billions of U.S. dollars.
Source: CoinGecko.
2 Background
2.1 Stablecoins
Stablecoins are crypto assets that seek to maintain a stable price, usually $1. Over the past several
years,stablecoinshaveexperiencedextraordinarygrowth;theirmarketcapitalizationhasincreased
from $5 billion in 2019 to about $125 billion in April 2023 (Figure 1). Currently, stablecoins
are predominantly used to facilitate the trading of other, volatile, crypto assets (such as Bitcoin),
primarily through trading platforms for digital assets (PWG, 2021). In this capacity, stablecoins
serve as private digital currencies of the crypto ecosystem.8
There are three main types of stablecoin arrangements: (1) stablecoins backed by traditional
financial assets; (2) stablecoins backed by crypto assets; and (3) algorithmic stablecoins.9 Stable-
coins issued by US-based entities have been typically backed by financial assets with little credit
8In this way, stablecoins are part of a larger class of new media of exchange that also includes central bank digital
currencies (CBDCs). The potential effects of CBDCs on payment systems and their participants are studied by, for
example, Berg et al. (2023), Di Maggio et al. (2024), and Agur et al. (2022).
9There is a fourth type of stablecoin, which is backed by commodities; since these stablecoins typically are not
pegged to the US dollar, we exclude them from our analysis. Finally, note that stablecoins can also be distinguished
by their degree of centralization. Some are issued by a single entity with centralized governance, such as USD Coin
5

===== PAGE 9 =====

or liquidity risk, such as bank deposits and US Treasury securities (usually with very short ma-
turities to minimize duration risk). By contrast, stablecoins issued by non-US-based (henceforth,
“offshore”) entities tend to be backed by riskier assets, such as commercial paper or other crypto
assets, or by algorithmic mechanisms.10
2.1.1 Financial Asset-Backed Stablecoins
Financialasset-backedstablecoins(henceforth,asset-backedstablecoins)representthelargesttype
of stablecoins, accounting for about 96 percent of the industry market capitalization in December
2022. Thesestablecoins, whichcan beissued by entitiesbased inthe UnitedStates or offshore,are
mainly backed by assets that carry little credit or liquidity risk, such as cash, Treasury securities,
certificates of deposit, and commercial paper. Their tokens are minted and burned (redeemed) by
a centralized entity. Customers may deposit dollars with the issuer and receive stablecoin tokens
issued to their public address on the blockchain. Conversely, customers may redeem their tokens
by sending them back to the issuer’s public address on the blockchain and receiving a dollar credit
to their bank account.
The major US-based asset-backed stablecoins include USD Coin (USDC), Binance USD
(BUSD), Pax Dollar (USDP), and Gemini Dollar (GUSD). As mentioned above, non-US-based
asset-backed stablecoins, like Tether (USDT) and TrueUSD (TUSD), are usually partially backed
by riskier assets, such as precious metals or corporate bonds.
2.1.2 Crypto-Backed Stablecoins
Crypto-backed stablecoins are issued by a smart contract and are backed by crypto assets, such
as Bitcoin, Ethereum, and even other stablecoins. Their peg is maintained by complex algorithms
and Tether. By contrast, others, such as DAI and the now-defunct TerraUSD, are issued and administered using smart
contracts under decentralized governance structures.
10In2021,Circle,aUS-basedentitythatco-issuesUSDCoin(USDC)withCoinbase,announcedthatitwasshifting
thecompositionofUSDC’sassetstoUSTreasuryobligationsanddeposits;previously,USDCalsohadheldrelatively
riskierassets,suchascorporatebonds.Itisimportanttonotethatthesestablecoinsdonotpayinteresttotheirholders,
even though the issuers do collect yield from the backing assets. As a result of rising interest rates in recent years, the
issuers have been collecting yield that is partially used to overcollateralize their underlying liabilities.
6

===== PAGE 10 =====

(Kozhan and Viswanath-Natraj, 2021; Lyons and Viswanath-Natraj, 2023). When the collateral is
volatile,crypto-backedstablecoinsaretypicallyovercollateralized.Themostpopularcrypto-backed
stablecoin is Dai (DAI); others include Magic Internet Money (MIM) and Liquity USD (LUSD).
2.1.3 Algorithmic Stablecoins
In contrast to asset-backed or crypto-collateralized stablecoins, algorithmic stablecoins are not
backed by assets; rather, their peg is maintained by an algorithmic mechanism that dynamically
adjustssupplyinresponsetodemandfluctuations.Thealgorithmautomaticallycreatesanddestroys
tokenstostabilizetheprice.Themostpopularalgorithmicstablecoinsworkbyissuingtwotokens:a
free-floatingcryptocurrency(e.g.,Luna)andastablecoinpeggedtotheUSdollar(e.g.,TerraUSD).
Asmartcontractallowsuserstomintoneunitofstablecoinbyburning$1worthofthefree-floating
cryptocurrency,andviceversa.Forinstance,supposethatLuna’spriceis$12andTerraUSD’sprice
drifts down to $0.90 because of low demand. Then, arbitrageurs can buy 12 TerraUSD tokens for
$10.80 (= $0.90× 12), burn them to obtain one Luna token, and sell it for $12 for a quick $1.20
profit. The decreased supply of TerraUSD will bring demand and supply back into balance and
hopefully restore the $1 market price.
ExamplesofalgorithmicstablecoinsincludeTerraUSD(UST),Frax(FRAX),andDecentralized
USD(USDD).Somealgorithmicstablecoins,suchasFrax,arehybrids;thatis,theirpegispartially
maintained through outside collateral and partially through an algorithmic mechanism, which in
Frax’s case issues a free-floating cryptocurrency called Frax Shares. In Appendix A, we describe
these algorithms in more detail.
2.2 Money Market Funds
MMFsareopen-endmutualfundsregisteredwiththeSecuritiesandExchangeCommission(SEC)
that—likestablecoins—seektomaintainastableprice(orminimalpricevolatility).Therearethree
types of MMFs: (1) government funds, which invest in cash, Treasury and agency securities, and
7

===== PAGE 11 =====

repurchase agreements (repos) collateralized by those assets; (2) prime funds, which, in addition,
can invest in non-government money market instruments, such as commercial paper and certifi-
cates of deposit; and (3) tax-exempt MMFs, which invest primarily in debt instruments issued by
municipalities.11
In addition to the characteristics of their portfolio holdings, MMFs may be distinguished by
their investor type, with institutional MMFs marketed to corporations and fiduciaries, and retail
MMFs limited to “natural persons.”12
As shown in Figure 2, the total net assets (TNA) of publicly offered MMFs have increased
significantly over the past few decades, from $3 trillion in 2008 to $5.2 trillion at the beginning of
2023. Since October 2016, when the 2014 SEC MMF reform took effect, most of the growth has
beendrivenbygovernmentMMFs,whichreached$4trillionatthebeginningof2023(80%ofthe
industry).13
2.3 Stablecoins versus MMFs: Differences and Similarities
There are several notable differences between stablecoins and MMFs. First, MMFs are regulated
by the SEC, whereas stablecoins are often not regulated. Second, MMFs are typically sponsored
by large banks or fund families, while stablecoins are sponsored by digital asset issuers. Third, the
clienteles of stablecoins and MMFs differ: MMF investors include large, traditional, institutional
investors, such as financial and nonfinancial corporations, whereas stablecoin investors are mainly
either retail investors or crypto-related companies. Fourth, MMFs are backed only by traditional
financial assets, while stablecoins are also backed by digital assets or an algorithm.
Finally, as Ma, Zeng and Zhang (2023) and Lyons and Viswanath-Natraj (2023) point out,
stablecoins are different from MMF shares in their creation and redemption mechanisms; in this
11MMFs are restricted by regulation to only hold relatively safe assets with short-term maturities.
12There are also non-public institutional funds, which are not available to the general public.
13Theincreaseingovernmentfundassetsbeginningin2016wasprimarilydrivenbytheSEC’s2014MMFreforms,
whichhadaneffectivedateofOctober2016(CiprianiandLaSpada,2021;Gissler,MacchiavelliandNarajabad,2021).
The increase that began in 2020 was driven by flight-to-safety inflows amid the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic
(Cipriani and La Spada, 2020; Anadu and Sanders, 2021).
8

===== PAGE 12 =====

Figure 2: Assets under management of U.S. MMFs from January 2008 to March 2023
Alt text: Stacked area chart showing total assets of U.S. MMFs in billions U.S. dollars.
Source: iMoneyNet. Data as of March 15, 2023.
Note: The areas in dark blue, light blue, and green represent the assets under management of government,
prime, and tax-exempt MMFs, respectively, in billions of US dollars.
regard,theyareclosertoexchange-tradedfunds(ETFs).MMFsharesareonlytradedintheprimary
market (i.e., they are only bought from and sold to the issuing fund) at their net asset value. In
contrast, like ETFs, stablecoins are predominantly traded on the secondary market, with only a
restricted set of participants having access to the primary market; for general stablecoin investors,
transactingonthesecondarymarket—buyingandsellingstablecoinsoncryptoexchanges—isoften
the only option.14
Despite these differences, MMFs serve as a useful benchmark for stablecoins. Among sta-
blecoins backed by traditional financial assets, US-based stablecoins look remarkably similar to
government MMFs. Figure 3 shows the composition of MMF and stablecoin portfolios in 2022.
Panel (a) shows that about 50 percent of government funds’ assets are held in repos, while a lit-
tle less than 50 percent are held in Treasury securities. Panel (b) of Figure 3 shows that, similar
14Interestingly,someassetmanagershaverecentlylaunchedmoneymarket(MM)ETFs,suchasBlackRockiShares
governmentandprimeMMETFs,whichmixthemoney-marketholdingstypicalofMMFswiththecreation-redemption
mechanism of ETFs.
9

===== PAGE 13 =====

Figure 3: Composition of money market fund and stablecoin asset portfolios in 2022
Alt text: Six stacked-area charts showing the portfolio allocation of two aggregate MMF types
(Government and Prime) and four stablecoins (BUSD, USDP, USDC, USDT).
Sources: iMoneyNet and stablecoin issuer attestations.
to government funds, US-based stablecoins (BUSD, USDP, and USDC) are primarily backed by
Treasury securities and repos. By contrast, the offshore, asset-backed stablecoin Tether (USDT) is
backed by a wider mix of assets that includes commercial paper and certificates of deposit, similar
to prime MMFs.
Both MMFs and stablecoins issue money-like liabilities that are vulnerable to runs. Cipriani
and La Spada (2021) show that MMF investors demand money-like assets and are willing to pay
a premium for greater moneyness, as manifested in the impact of the 2014 SEC MMF reform.
This reform, which took effect in October 2016, introduced redemption gates and fees based on
portfolio liquidity for all prime funds and a floating net asset value (NAV) for institutional ones.
Both changes increased the information sensitivity and therefore decreased the money-likeness of
primefunds,resultingingreaterdifferentiationbetweenprimeandgovernmentMMFs.Government
funds, which were unaffected by the reform, were afterwards seen as more money-like than prime
funds. Indeed, in the months ahead of October 2016, more than $1 trillion flowed from prime to
government MMFs as the total size of the MMF industry stayed roughly unchanged. In summary,
10

===== PAGE 14 =====

investorsarewillingtoacceptlowernetyieldsingovernmentfundsforaccesstoamoremoney-like
product.
Money-like liabilities are a known source of run risk; indeed, MMFs were subject to runs in
2008andmorerecentlyin2020.Althoughstablecoinshavearedemptionmechanismthatresembles
that of ETFs, Ma et al. (2023) show theoretically that stablecoins are also exposed to run risk. The
reason is that, in contrast to what happens in ETFs, stablecoin primary-market participants can
create and redeem tokens at a fixed price. When the resources backing the stablecoin are less
than the value of tokens in circulation, this creates a first-mover advantage in the primary market.
As investors rush to sell their tokens to primary market participants, the first-mover advantage is
transmitted to the secondary market.
Given the similarities between stablecoins and MMFs (they are used as a store of value, they
have different degrees of risk, and they are exposed to runs), it is important to ascertain whether
they also share similar financial stability properties. Section 2.4 discusses the typical features
of flight-to-safety episodes in the MMF industry, while Section 4 presents new evidence on the
flight-to-safety dynamics within the stablecoin ecosystem.
2.4 Flights to Safety in MMFs
During episodes of stress in the MMF industry, investors run on the funds more exposed to the
source of risk; these have generally been prime funds, which hold unsecured private debt such as
bank certificates of deposit. The same investors then typically deposit their cash with government
funds, which hold either public debt or secured private debt. These flight-to-safety dynamics in
MMFs occurred during the 2008 financial crisis, the 2011 European sovereign debt crisis, and the
March 2020 COVID-19 crisis.
In particular, the failure of Lehman Brothers on September 15, 2008, triggered a run on the
Reserve Primary Fund, an MMF whose holdings of Lehman Brothers commercial paper had
suddenly collapsed in value. Panic soon spread to other institutional prime funds, especially those
11

===== PAGE 15 =====

Figure 4: MMF flows during periods of stress
Alt text: Two time series charts showing daily aggregate MMF flows in billions U.S. dollars.
(a) 2008 run
 (b) 2020 run
Source: iMoneyNet.
Note: Panel (a) shows the total net flows of institutional prime and government MMFs during the 2008
crisis. The dotted black vertical line indicates the beginning of the 2008 run on MMFs when Lehman
Brothers failed in September 2008. Likewise, Panel (b) displays the daily net flows of institutional prime
and government MMFs during the March 2020 COVID-19 crisis (dashed vertical line).
exposed to other assets that were losing value such as asset-backed commercial paper (McCabe,
2010; Kacperczyk and Schnabl, 2013; Duygan-Bump et al., 2013). Panel (a) of Figure 4 shows the
total net flows for government and prime share classes offered to institutional investors during the
2008–2010 period.
The COVID-19 shock triggered another run on prime MMFs in early 2020, as shown in Panel
(b) of Figure 4; similarly to 2008, MMFs experienced a sizable industry-wide reallocation from
prime to government funds. Over the two-week period ending on March 20, 2020, net outflows
frominstitutionalprimefundstotaled$90billion,27percentofthesefunds’assetsatthebeginning
of March, while net outflows from retail prime funds amounted to $33 billion, 7 percent of their
assets (PWG, 2020). During the same period, government funds experienced significant inflows.
CiprianiandLaSpada(2020)showthat,duetolowswitchingcosts,investorsranfromprimefunds
to government funds in the same family.
12

===== PAGE 16 =====

3 Data
We construct a panel of the 12 stablecoins listed in Table 1, using daily data from February
2015 through April 2023 from CoinGecko. For each day-stablecoin observation, we obtain the
marketcapitalizationandvolume-weightedaveragepriceacrossexchangesindollars.Wecalculate
each stablecoin’s circulation, defined as the number of tokens outstanding, by dividing market
capitalization by the price. We then estimate flows as changes in circulation.15
Our main sample consists of daily data on the 12 stablecoins reported in Table 1 from January
2021 to March 15, 2023, although individual analyses only use a subset of these data. We further
define two “event” samples: January 1, 2022, through the end of the TerraUSD run on May 16,
2022 (“the 2022 sample”), and November 1, 2022, through the end of the USDC run on March
12, 2023 (“the 2023 sample”). To have the same number of stablecoins in each event sample and
to ensure that our results are not driven by the behavior of the smallest stablecoins, we use the 10
largest stablecoins at the start of 2022 and 2023, respectively; we report the stablecoins in the two
event samples in the last two columns of Table 1.16The stablecoins in the 2022 and 2023 samples
comprise more than 99 precent of market capitalization at the start of 2022 and 2023, respectively.
Ineachofthe2022and2023samples,roughlythesamenumberofstablecoinsfallintoeachof
fourmajorcategoriesofstablecoins:US-basedasset-backed,offshoreasset-backed,crypto-backed,
and algorithmic stablecoins. In the 2022 panel, three stablecoins are US-based and backed by
traditional financial assets (USDC, BUSD, and USDP), two are offshore and backed by traditional
financial assets (USDT and TUSD), three are backed by crypto assets (DAI, MIM, and LUSD),
15CoinGecko reports market capitalization and price. CoinGecko’s glossary definesmarket capitalization as the
product of the circulating supply of tokens and its current price, andcirculating supply as the total supply minus any
tokens assigned to the token’s issuer and affiliates. The practice of assigning tokens to the issuer as a form of “sweat
equity”iscommonamongunbacked,free-floatingtokensbut,tothebestofourknowledge,unheardofforstablecoins.
Wethusexpectthedifferencebetweenmarketcapitalizationandcirculatingsupplytobeimmaterial.SeeCoinGecko’s
Methodology and Glossary pages for more information.
16The2022sampleincludesTerraUSD,whosestabilizationalgorithmcollapsedin2022.The2023sampleincludes
stablecoins that were not in the top 10 in 2022, including a new algorithmic stablecoin (USDD) and an additional
US-based stablecoin (GUSD).
13

===== PAGE 17 =====

Table 1: Stablecoins in our sample by jurisdiction and stabilization mechanism
Name Symbol US-
based Backing Market
Cap ($m) Collateral Type 2022
Sample
2023
Sample
Tether USDT N Assets 73,378 Cash, US
Treasuries, Corp.
Debt
Y Y
USD Coin USDC Y Assets 38,426 Cash, US
Treasuries, CD
Y Y
Binance USD BUSD Y Assets 8,381 Cash, US
Treasuries
Y Y
Dai DAI N Crypto assets 6,042 Y Y
TrueUSD TUSD N Assets 2,032 Cash Y Y
Frax FRAX N Algorithm 1,043 Y Y
Pax Dollar USDP Y Assets 835 Cash and Cash
Equiv.
Y Y
Decentralized
USD
USDD N Algorithm 721 N Y
Gemini Dollar GUSD Y Assets 387 Cash, Cash
Equiv., MMMF
N Y
Liquity USD LUSD N Crypto assets 257 Y Y
TerraUSD UST N Algorithm 232 Y N
Magic Internet
Money
MIM N Crypto assets 83 Y N
Sources: CoinGecko. The data are as of March 15, 2023.
Note: This table presents summary statistics for the stablecoins used in the analysis. Market Cap is in millions of US
dollars. For stablecoins backed by traditional financial assets, we indicate the types of assets in the Collateral Type
column.
14

===== PAGE 18 =====

Figure 5: Crypto stress measure
Alt text: Time series chart of Bitcoin price in U.S. dollars.
Sources: Authors’ computations based on data from CoinGecko. Data as of March 15, 2023.
Note: The blue area represents the price of Bitcoin in US dollars. The vertical red lines indicate the stress
days (“shocks”) identified using the methodology described in the text. The data are daily, and the sample
period is January 2021 to March 2023.
and two are algorithmic (UST and FRAX).17In the 2023 panel, four stablecoins are US-based and
backed by traditional financial assets (USDC, BUSD, USDP, and GUSD), two are offshore and
backed by traditional financial assets (USDT and TUSD), two are backed by crypto assets (DAI
and LUSD), and two are backed by algorithms (USDD and FRAX).
We also obtain Bitcoin prices over our entire sample period, which we use in some analyses as
an indicator of stress in the crypto ecosystem. Specifically, we identify stress days as those in the
bottom 5% of the daily return distribution (shown by the vertical red lines in Figure 5.)
Finally, in addition to daily prices and market capitalization from CoinGecko, we also obtain
daily data from DefiLlama on the value of stablecoins staked in 10 different blockchains. These
data cover the event window of the TerraUSD run, from May 8, 2022, through May 16, 2022, and
thewindowoftheUSDCrun,fromMarch9,2023,throughMarch12,2023.Forthreeblockchains
17As described in Appendix A, TUSD used to be US-based until December 2020 but was later sold to an Asian
conglomerate.
15

===== PAGE 19 =====

(Terra,Solana,andTron),dataonlybeginsonMay12,2022andthusweexcludetheseblockchains
from the 2022 blockchain-level flow analysis in Section 4.3 below.
4 Empirical Analysis
Inthissection,weprovideempiricalevidenceofflightstosafetyinstablecoins.Thefirstsubsection
shows how stress in Bitcoin valuation is followed by stablecoin outflows that vary in intensity for
differentstablecointypes.Thesecondsubsectionconductseventstudiesthatquantifytheeffectsof
theTerracollapseandtheSVBbankruptcyonthestablecoinmarket.Thethirdsubsectionanalyzes
stablecoin flows within blockchains. Each of these stablecoin dynamics has a parallel with the
behavior of investor flows in the MMF industry.
4.1 Flights to Safety in Stablecoins
Inthissubsection,weestimatetheeffectofcryptomarketshocksonstablecoins.Ourshockmeasure
isadummyvariablefor stressdaysincryptomarkets,identifiedasdays inthe5thpercentileofthe
distribution of Bitcoin daily price changes over our sample period (see Figure 5). For this analysis,
weuseourmainsample(alltwelvestablecoins)overtheperiodstartinginJanuary2021andending
on March 15, 2023. Prior to the beginning of this period, the market capitalization of all but the
major asset-backed stablecoins was negligible.
We use the local projection method (Jordà, 2005) to estimate the response of stablecoin flows
toourshockmeasure.Foreachhorizon ℎ,weestimatethefollowingdailyregressionusingthefull
panel of stablecoins:
Flow𝑡+ℎ
𝑖,𝑡−1 =
2∑︁
𝑛=0
Shock𝑡−𝑛

𝛽1
ℎ,𝑛US𝑖+𝛽2
ℎ,𝑛Offshore𝑖+𝛽3
ℎ,𝑛Crypto𝑖+𝛽4
ℎ,𝑛Algo𝑖

+
+
2∑︁
𝑛=1
𝛾ℎ,𝑛Flow𝑡−𝑛
𝑖,𝑡−𝑛−1+𝜇ℎ,𝑖+𝜀𝑖,𝑡, (1)
16

===== PAGE 20 =====

where Flow𝑡+ℎ
𝑖,𝑡−1 is the cumulative percentage change in the outstanding number of tokens of coin𝑖
at𝑡+ℎ relativeto 𝑡− 1,whileFlow 𝑡−𝑛
𝑖,𝑡−𝑛−1 isthedailypercentagechangeintheoutstandingnumber
of tokens of coin𝑖 at𝑡−𝑛 relative to𝑡−𝑛− 1. Shock𝑡 is an indicator variable that equals 1 if day
𝑡 is a stress day (as defined in Section 3) and 0 otherwise. US𝑖, Offshore𝑖, Crypto𝑖, and Algo𝑖 are
fourindicatorvariablesthatequal1ifstablecoin 𝑖is,respectively,US-based,offshoreasset-backed,
backed by crypto assets, and algorithmic (as described in Table 1).18 𝜇ℎ,𝑖 is the coin fixed effect
(which is different for each horizonℎ; that is, in each regression). We include lagged stablecoin
flowstocontrolforserialcorrelationandpossibletrends;inAppendixB,weshowthatinformation-
based selection criteria suggest that the optimal number of lags is two. We run regression (1) for
horizons up to eight days after the crypto market shock, that is,ℎ∈{ 0, 1,... 8}.
The regression is estimated by weighted least squares using each stablecoin’s market capital-
ization one month prior as the weight so as to give greater weight to the larger stablecoins. We use
market capitalization lagged by one month to avoid any mechanical relation between current flows
and current weights. Standard errors are clustered at the coin and date levels.19
The coefficients𝛽1
ℎ,0,𝛽2
ℎ,0,𝛽3
ℎ,0, and𝛽4
ℎ,0 estimate the effects of a crypto market shock at time𝑡
on the cumulative percentage flows into the different stablecoin types between time𝑡 and𝑡+ℎ. In
particular, theℎ = 0 coefficient represents the same-day effect of the shock, that is, the effect of a
significant drop in the price of Bitcoin in the last 24 hours on the percentage flows in stablecoins
during the same period.
In Figure 6, we plot the response of stablecoins’ cumulative percentage flows to our measure
of crypto market stress at different horizons and for the four groups of stablecoins described
above: US-based (𝛽1
ℎ,0), offshore asset-backed (𝛽2
ℎ,0), crypto-backed (𝛽3
ℎ,0), and algorithmic (𝛽4
ℎ,0).
The corresponding regression estimates are shown in the Appendix (Table B.2). The blue lines
representthepointestimates;thesolidanddashedredlinesrepresentthe90percentand95percent
confidence intervals, respectively.
18Since these four categories are mutually exclusive and exhaustive, US𝑖+Offshore𝑖+Crypto𝑖+Algo𝑖 = 1.
19In Appendix B, we repeat the same analysis using different lag lengths and standard error specifications; the
results are similar.
17

===== PAGE 21 =====

Figure 6: Impulse response functions by stablecoin type
Alttext:Fourtime-serieschartsshowingthecumulativepercentchangeinstablecoinassetsforfour
different types of stablecoin: U.S.-based, offshore asset-backed, crypto-backed, and algorithmic.
(a) U.S.-based
 (b) Offshore asset-backed
(c) Crypto-backed
 (d) Algorithmic
Sources: Authors’ computations based on data from CoinGecko.
Note:Thebluelinerepresentstheestimatedimpulseresponsefunctionforinvestornetflowsintoacategory
of stablecoins upon shocks to the price of Bitcoin. The solid and dashed red lines represent the 90 and 95
percent confidence intervals, respectively.
18

===== PAGE 22 =====

The response of stablecoin flows to crypto market stress depends on collateral type. Following
a large decline in the price of Bitcoin, the flows of algorithmic stablecoins have the most negative
reaction(Panel(d)),followedbycrypto-basedstablecoins(Panel(c)),andbyamoremutedresponse
of offshore asset-backed stablecoins (Panel (b)). Eight days after a shock, the expected excess
cumulative flows for these three stablecoin types are−9.2%,−3.0%, and−1.1%. In contrast, the
expected cumulative flows of US-based stablecoins (Panel (a)) show a positive reaction of+1.9%,
consistent with a flight to safety. The flow difference between US-based stablecoins and others
is statistically significant (see Table B.2 in Appendix B). These differential outflows suggest that,
followingnegativeshockstonon-stablecoincryptoassets,investorsshunriskierstablecoins—those
backedeitherbyriskierassetsorbyalgorithmsrelying,atleastinpart,oninvestorconfidence—and
flee to stablecoins backed by safer assets.
Similarflight-to-safetydynamicsaredocumentedintheMMFliterature(Bouveret,Martinand
McCabe,2022;CiprianiandLaSpada,2020,2021).Followingstressevents,moneyfundinvestors
run on the more exposed prime funds and flee to the safer government MMFs.
4.2 Event Studies
4.2.1 The 2022 Terra Collapse
Inmanyways,theMay2022stablecoinstressepisodemirroredthe2008and2020MMFepisodes.
The run on the algorithmic stablecoin TerraUSD (UST) had strong negative spillovers into the
broaderoffshorestablecoinindustry;theonlyexceptionswereUS-basedstablecoins,whichreceived
inflows,similarlytohowgovernmentMMFsreceiveinflowswheninvestorsrunfromprimeMMFs.
The run began when TerraUSD’s algorithmic stabilization mechanism collapsed. As described
in Appendix A.4, arbitrage should have pegged the price of TerraUSD at $1 as long as the price
of its sister token, Luna, was above zero, but features of the mechanism left open the possibility
for depegging events. In early 2022, asset prices declined, including those of important crypto
assets such as Bitcoin, Ethereum, and Luna. At the same time, there was increasing awareness
19

===== PAGE 23 =====

that Anchor, a protocol offered by the developers of the Terra blockchain, would not be able to
keep their promised 20 percent interest rate to TerraUSD depositors.20 The decreasing value of
Luna, combined with the uncertainty about the Anchor protocol’s sustainability, led to a loss of
confidence in the ability of the TerraUSD algorithm to maintain the US dollar peg and triggered
the run on TerraUSD (for additional details, see Liu et al., 2023).
Panel (a) of Figure 7 shows that Luna’s price dipped significantly on May 8, 2022, when the
token closed at $64.08. By the next day, Luna’s price had halved to $32.00; by May 12, Luna was
trading at $0.4 cents, or 0.004% of its January 1 value. The same figure shows that TerraUSD’s
price plummeted following the collapse of Luna: TerraUSD was worth $0.996 on May 8, $0.800
onMay9,andonly$0.409onMay12.AfterMay17,2022,thepriceofTerraUSDneverexceeded
$0.10. Importantly, the price of TerraUSD hovered near zero because investors expected the price
of Luna to remain at zero; as a result, the algorithmic stability mechanism was broken. Panel (b)
showsthattherunreversedallofTerraUSD’s2022growthascirculationreturnedtoJanuary2022
values, and its market capitalization dropped by about 95 percent.
AswithMMFstressepisodes,theMay2022TerraUSDrunwascharacterizedbystrongnegative
spilloverintothebroaderstablecoinindustry.Panel(a)ofFigure8showssignificantoutflowsfrom
alloffshorestablecoinsrelativetoUS-basedstablecoins,apatternreminiscentofrunsamongprime
MMFs. Panel (b) breaks down the results by stablecoin type. It shows that non-US asset-backed,
algorithmic,andcrypto-collateralizedstablecoinsexperiencedoutflowsinthewakeofTerraUSD’s
collapse, and the effect was strongest for the algorithmic stablecoin Frax, which suffered a 45
percent loss of its May 1 market capitalization by May 16, 2022.
20The Anchor protocol operator, with the backing of the Terra developers, lent TerraUSD deposits to borrowers,
who used them to buy more volatile crypto assets and invest in decentralized finance protocols. Anchor aggregated
these higher and more volatile yields and passed them to TerraUSD depositors. The massive growth of TerraUSD in
early 2022 was largely due to the interest rates paid by the Anchor protocol; according to decrypt.co, 72 percent of all
TerraUSD in circulation was invested in Anchor.
20

===== PAGE 24 =====

Figure 7: The Terra collapse of 2022
Alt text: Two time-series charts showing the prices of TerraUSD and Luna tokens (left) and
TerraUSD circulation (right).
(a) TerraUSD and Luna Prices
 (b) TerraUSD Circulation
Source: CoinGecko.
Note:TheleftpanelshowsdailyclosingpricesforLunaandTerraUSD.Therightpanelshowsthecirculation
andmarketcapitalizationofTerraUSDin2022.ThedashedverticallinesdenoteMay8,2022,thefirstday
of the TerraUSD run.
Figure 8: Stablecoin flows around the Terra collapse
Alt text: Two time-series charts showing cumulative changes to stablecoin assets in billions U.S.
dollars.
(a) U.S.-based vs. offshore
 (b) By type
Source: CoinGecko.
Note: Cumulative flows by stablecoin type since March 1, 2022. The dashed vertical line denotes May 8,
2022,thefirstdayoftheTerraUSDrun.Panel(a)showsalloffshorestablecoinscombined,whilePanel(b)
breaks them down by type. “Offshore AB” stands for “Offshore Asset-Backed.”
21

===== PAGE 25 =====

ToquantifytheoutflowssufferedbyoffshorestablecoinsrelativetotheirUS-basedcounterparts
in May 2022, we run the following regression with daily data:
Flow𝑡
𝑖,𝑡−1 =𝛽 Run𝑡×Offshore𝑖+𝛼𝑖+𝛾𝑡+𝜀𝑖,𝑡, (2)
where Flow𝑡
𝑖,𝑡−1 is the daily percentage change in the outstanding number of tokens of coin𝑖 at𝑡
relative to𝑡− 1, Run𝑡 is an indicator variable for the run period (May 8 through May 16, 2022,
inclusive), Offshore𝑖 is an indicator variable for non-US-based stablecoins (asset-backed, crypto-
backed,oralgorithmic), 𝛼𝑖 arestablecoinfixedeffects,and 𝛾𝑡 aredatefixedeffects.Standarderrors
are Driscoll-Kraay with five lags. The sample is January 1 through May 16, 2022.
Column (1) of Table 2 shows that during the run, the daily percentage change in circulation in
offshoreasset-backed,crypto-collateralized,andalgorithmicstablecoinswas2.3percentagepoints
lowerthanthechangeincirculationinUS-basedstablecoins.Column(2)breaksdownthisanalysis
by category, showing that algorithmic and crypto-collateralized stablecoins were the most affected
by the run, with changes in circulation 5.7 and 3.6 percentage points lower, respectively, than
those in US-based stablecoins; the impact on offshore asset-backed stablecoins was smaller (1.4
percentage points).
4.2.2 The Failure of Silicon Valley Bank and the 2023 Run on USDC
Since2020,commercialbankshaveincreasedtheirprovisionofservicestocryptoindustryclients.
Asstablecoinsgrewrapidlyfromearly2020through2022,theyincreasedtheirdepositswithsome
commercial banks. Figure 9 shows the total deposits at three banks serving stablecoins from 2018
through 2022.21 As shown in the figure, since 2020, these banks’ deposits experienced significant
growth,alongwiththemarketcapitalizationofstablecoins.Ifoneofthesebanksweretofinditself
in trouble, a stablecoin issuer with deposits above the FDIC insurance limit could suddenly be
21We identify these banks based on the list of banks disclosed in stablecoin issuers’ attestations.
22

===== PAGE 26 =====

Table 2: Change in circulation during May 2022 run by stablecoin type
Flows𝑖𝑡 (%)
(1) (2)
Run𝑡×Offshore𝑖 -2.345∗∗
(0.899)
Run𝑡×Offshore Asset Backed𝑖 -1.392∗
(0.831)
Run𝑡×Algorithmic𝑖 -5.719∗∗
(2.746)
Run𝑡×Crypto Collateralized𝑖 -3.602∗∗∗
(1.176)
Coin FE Yes Yes
Date FE Yes Yes
Run Definition 5/8/22-5/16/22 5/8/22-5/16/22
Sample 1/1/22-5/16/22 1/1/22-5/16/22
𝑅2 0.24 0.29
Observations 1360 1360
Note: This table reports daily percentage change in circulation regressed on an indicator for the May 2022
run period interacted with stablecoin-type indicators. Run𝑡 equals 1 on May 8 through May 16, 2022,
inclusive. The US-based stablecoins are USDC, BUSD, and USDP; offshore asset-backed stablecoins are
USDTandTUSD;crypto-collateralizedstablecoinsareDAI,MIM,andLUSD;andalgorithmicstablecoins
areUSTandFRAX.Driscoll-Kraaystandarderrorswithfivelagsareinparentheses.***,**,and*represent
1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance.
23

===== PAGE 27 =====

Figure 9: Growth in deposits of banks serving stablecoin issuers
Alt text: Three time-series charts of deposits in billion U.S. dollars for Silicon Valley Bank,
Signature, and Silvergate.
Source: Call Reports.
unable to access these deposits and fail to meet its obligations. This would likely trigger a run by
its investors.
The stablecoin USDC found itself precisely in this situation when Silicon Valley Bank (SVB)
suffered a run on March 9, 2023, and was taken over by the FDIC on March 10; on March 12, the
FDIC, with the Department of the Treasury and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, announced that SVB resolution would fully protect all depositors, including uninsured
ones.22 The run on USDC began on March 9 when investors became concerned about USDC’s
ability to access the cash it had deposited with SVB. From July 2022 through March 2023, USDC
listedpubliclythatitheldpartofitscashatSVB.WhenSVBcollapsed,USDC’sinvestorsquickly
ran. Panel (a) of Figure 10 shows that after March 9, the majority of USDC outflows likely went
into USDT and TUSD, two offshore asset-backed stablecoins. Note that other stablecoins in our
sample did not have sizable and persistent dollar flows, so we exclude them from the plot.
22See https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20230312b.htm.
24

===== PAGE 28 =====

Figure 10: Stablecoin flows around Silicon Valley Bank failure
Alt text: Two time-series charts showing cumulative changes to stablecoin assets in billions U.S.
dollars.
(a) By coin
 (b) U.S.-based vs. offshore
Source: CoinGecko.
Note: This figure depicts cumulative flows since January 1, 2023. Panel (a) shows disaggregated flows by
stablecoin, showing only those with significant net flows in March 2023. Panel (b) shows aggregate flows
forU.S.-basedversusoffshorestablecoins.ThedashedverticallineisdrawnatMarch9,2023,thedaySVB
was taken over by the FDIC.
TherunonUSDCwasdifferentfromtheMMFrunsof2008and2020,andfromtheTerraUSD
run of 2022, in two ways. First, the run on USDC did not have negative spillovers into stablecoins
similar to USDC. Our 2023 sample contains four US-based asset-backed stablecoins: USDC,
BUSD,USDP,andGUSD.InMarch2023,GUSDandUSDPdidnothavesignificantdollarflows,
andBUSDexperiencedanoticeableslowdownofpreviouslysteadyoutflowsthathadbeguninmid-
February.23 Although similar to USDC in terms of jurisdiction and broad portfolio composition,
BUSD, USDP, and GUSD promptly reported having no exposure to SVB in March 2023.24
23Outflows from BUSD started after its issuer (Paxos) announced that it would stop minting BUSD at the direction
of the New York State Department of Financial Services. BUSD lost market capitalization at a rate of about $350
million per day from February 14 to March 6, 2023; this loss slowed to about $38 million per day from March 7 to
June 5, 2023.
24For BUSD and USDP, Paxos issued the following statement on Twitter: “Paxos has no relationship
with Silicon Valley Bank. For further certainty, Paxos stablecoins have zero exposure to Silicon Valley Bank
failure.” See https://twitter.com/Paxos/status/1634242623916642304. Similarly, regarding GUSD, Gemini issued
the following statement: “@Gemini does not have any banking relationship with Silicon Valley Bank.” See
https://twitter.com/Gemini/status/1634260777686257664.
25

===== PAGE 29 =====

Thesecondwayinwhichthe2023runonUSDCdistinguisheditselffrommostMMFrunsand
the2022TerraUSDrunwasthatassetsfledfromastablecointhatwaspreviouslyconsideredamong
thesafestonestostablecoinsthatwereusuallyseenasriskier.Panel(b)ofFigure10showsaggregate
cumulativeflowsfromJanuarytoApril2023,separatelyforUS-basedandoffshorestablecoinsofall
types.ThefigureshowsclearlythatasUS-basedstablecoinssufferedoutflowsduringMarch(mostly
attributabletotherunonUSDC,withsomeadditionaloutflowsfromBUSD’songoingwind-down),
offshore stablecoins (asset-backed, crypto-collateralized, and algorithmic) experienced significant
inflows.
To quantify the inflows experienced by offshore stablecoins relative to US-based stablecoins
duringthe2023run,weagainestimateregression(2).Column(1)ofTable3showsthat,compared
with US-based stablecoins, the average offshore stablecoin experienced daily inflows larger by
1.3 percentage points from March 9 to March 12 (our definition of the run period). Column (2)
separatestheanalysisbystablecointypetoshowthatoffshoreasset-backed,algorithmic,andcrypto-
collateralized stablecoins all received inflows during the run. The effect on crypto-collateralized
stablecoins is especially substantial in the short term because DAI experienced large daily inflows,
beginning on March 11. These inflows, however, reversed by the end of March and were small in
dollaramountsrelativetoinflowstotheoffshoreasset-backedstablecoinsTetherandTrueUSD(see
again Figure 10).25
4.2.3 Investors’ Flight to Safety: MMFs vs. Stablecoin Runs
During periods of crypto market stress, stablecoin investors tend to flee to safety. What constitutes
“safety,”however,dependsonthecircumstances.Specifically,whetheranassetisconsidered“safe”
dependsonthenatureoftheriskidentifiedbyinvestorsasthedriverofanadverseevent.Following
25As a robustness check, we extend the run period to the end of March 2023 and show that the coefficients on
the offshore asset-backed and algorithmic categories are comparable to those in Table 3. The coefficient on crypto-
collateralized stablecoins is positive but no longer significant even at the 10 percent level, indicating that the effect of
the run on crypto-collateralized stablecoins was short-lived.
26

===== PAGE 30 =====

Table 3: Change in circulation during March 2023 run by stablecoin type
Flows𝑖𝑡(%)
(1) (2)
Run𝑡×Offshore𝑖 1.295∗∗
(0.575)
Run𝑡×Offshore Asset Backed𝑖 1.162∗∗
(0.508)
Run𝑡×Algorithmic𝑖 1.163∗∗∗
(0.410)
Run𝑡×Crypto-Collateralized𝑖 3.052∗∗
(1.520)
Coin FE Yes Yes
Date FE Yes Yes
Run Definition 3/9/23-3/12/23 3/9/23-3/12/23
Sample 11/1/22-3/12/23 11/1/22-3/12/23
𝑅2 0.12 0.12
Observations 1320 1320
Note:ThistablereportsdailypercentagechangeincirculationregressedonanindicatorfortheMarch2023
run period interacted with stablecoin types. Run𝑡 equals 1 on March 9 through March 12, 2023, inclusive.
The US-based stablecoins are USDC, BUSD, USDP, and GUSD; offshore asset-backed stablecoins are
USDT and TUSD; crypto-collateralized stablecoins are DAI and LUSD; and algorithmic stablecoins are
USDD and FRAX. Driscoll-Kraay standard errors with 5 lags are in parentheses. ***, **, and * represent
1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance.
27

===== PAGE 31 =====

a shock, investors run on investment vehicles that are more exposed to the identified risk while at
the same time moving funds to the vehicles with less or no exposure to such risk.
ThisprincipleexplainsnotonlyourfindingthatstablecoininvestorsfleetoUS-basedstablecoins
followingcryptomarketshocks,butalsothedynamicsofflowstothetwolargeststablecoins,Tether
andUSDC,duringthe2022and2023stablecoinruns.IntheaftermathofthecollapseofTerraUSD
in May 2022, USDC—the second-largest stablecoin—experienced large net inflows, as investors
at that time deemed it the safest stablecoin because it reportedly held Treasury securities and
bank deposits, assets generally regarded as safe. By contrast, Tether—the largest stablecoin—
experienced net outflows, likely because it held commercial paper and other securities that are
generally considered riskier (Figure 8, Panel (b)).
After the failure of SVB in March 2023, however, USDC experienced large net redemptions
(Figure 10), and its price dropped to as low as $0.88.26 These redemptions occurred because
$3.3 billion (about 8 percent) of USDC’s assets comprised uninsured deposits held at SVB.27 The
uncertainty around the fate of those uninsured deposits rendered some of USDC’s assets risky, as
they mightnot havebeen availableto maintainUSDC’s $1.00peg. The chanceof nontriviallosses
intheUSDCportfoliomadeitrationalforUSDCholderstorun.Tetherdidnotexperienceasimilar
shock to its asset portfolio because it did not have cash deposits at SVB or other banks negatively
affected by the SVB run. As a result, Tether was the beneficiary of notable flight-to-safety inflows
during this episode, and its price rose to $1.03.
Note, however, that in the MMF industry, flight-to-safety episodes have always seen investors
leaving prime MMFs for government MMFs. The reason is that government funds had limited
exposuretotherisksthattriggeredtherunsonprimefunds;incontrasttoprimeMMFs,government
26This price reflects secondary market transactions. As explained in Section 2.1.1, in addition to secondary market
transactions,someinvestorsmayredeemorpurchasetokensdirectlywiththestablecoinissuer(thatis,throughprimary
market transactions). We are not aware that any USDC tokens were redeemed for less than $1 in the primary market.
27These numbers are based on USDC’s reported assets of $42.1 billion as of March 13, 2023. Other assets backing
USDCincluded$32.4billion(77percentofthetotal)inUSTreasurybills,alongwith$5.4billion(13percent)and$1
billion in deposits at BNY Mellon and Customers Bank, respectively (Circle, 2023).
28

===== PAGE 32 =====

MMFs can hold only government debt and repos backed by it, and they cannot impose redemption
gates or liquidity fees.
4.3 Blockchain-specific Run Dynamics
Cipriani and La Spada (2020) show that, during the 2008 and 2020 crises, outflows from prime
MMF investors largely went into government MMFs within the same fund family, possibly due
to low switching costs. Panel (a) of Figure 11, for example, shows the scatterplot of cumulative
government-MMF inflows against cumulative prime-MMF outflows within the same fund family
during the March 2020 crisis, together with a least-squares fit line, indicating a clear positive
relationship.
We find a similar behavior during stablecoin stress events. There are no “fund families” in the
stablecoinworld;thereare,however,blockchains,withinwhichstablecoinsaretraded.Itispossible
tomovestablecoinsfromoneblockchaintoanother,butdoingsomayincurtransactionfeesonboth
theoriginandthedestinationblockchain.Wethusstudywhetherstablecoinflowswithinblockchains
display a pattern similar to MMF flows within fund families during periods of instability. Panel
(b) of Figure 11 shows the daily outflows from offshore stablecoins in each blockchain against the
daily inflows into US stablecoins within the same blockchain during the 2022 run (that is, each
dot represents a US-offshore stablecoin pair on a specific blockchain). Overall, consistent with the
pattern observed in MMF families, days of higher outflows from offshore stablecoins are also days
of higher inflows into US stablecoins within the same blockchain.
If we examine the dynamics on large and small blockchains separately (Panels (c) and (d) of
Figure 11), however, we observe an important difference. For the large blockchains, the pattern
is similar to that observed in the aggregate, with outflows from offshore coins corresponding to
inflows into US-based coins on the same blockchain. For smaller blockchains, by contrast, we find
thatdaysofhighoutflowsfromoffshorecoinsarealsodaysofhighoutflowsfromUS-basedcoins.
This suggests that in May 2022, investors did not switch from offshore to US-based stablecoins
29

===== PAGE 33 =====

within smaller blockchains, but rather they left these blockchains altogether, consistent with these
blockchains being perceived as riskier.28
In Table 4, we formally confirm the visual evidence from Figure 11 by regressing daily inflows
into US-based stablecoins in large (small) blockchains on outflows to offshore stablecoins in large
(small) blockchains, during the 2022 run.29 The first column shows the results for all blockchains;
the second column shows the results for large blockchains—those with stablecoin circulations $10
billion or greater; the third shows results for small blockchains—with circulations less than $10
billion. These results corroborate the patterns observed above: Investors shift from offshore to US
stablecoins on larger blockchains, whereas they flee both stablecoin types on smaller blockchains.
Specifically, during the 2022 run, a $1 outflow from offshore stablecoins corresponds to a $0.42
inflowinUS-basedstablecoinswithinlargeblockchains;onsmallerblockchains,a$1outflowfrom
offshore stablecoins corresponds to a $1 outflow from US ones.30
InFigure12andTable5,werepeatourblockchain-levelanalysisfortheMarch2023run,when
investors left US stablecoins for offshore ones. Panel (a) of Figure 12 shows that, during March 9
through 12, 2023, days of higher outflows from US stablecoins are also days of higher inflows into
offshore stablecoins within each of the large blockchains. Panel (b) shows that, by contrast, higher
outflows from US stablecoins are associated with higher outflows from US stablecoins on small
blockchains, although the effect is less pronounced than during the 2022 run. Table 5 tests both of
these observations formally. Within large blockchains, a $1 outflow from stressed US stablecoins
correspondstoa$0.22inflowinoffshorestablecoinsduringthe2023run.Withinsmallblockchains,
instead, the effect is negative and insignificant.
28In proof-of-stake blockchains, a user is selected as a transaction validator with a probability proportional to the
share of the native token held by that user. All else being equal, smaller proof-of-stake chains are less secure because
it would be easier for an adversary to gain control of a large amount of stake and manipulate transactions in their favor
via double spending attacks.
29AsdiscussedinSection3,thisanalysisislimitedtothesevenblockchainsforwhichDefiLlamahasdatathroughout
the run period.
30Thequantitativeestimatesalsoindicatethat,despitethewithin-blockchainsubstitution,therewasonnetoutflows
even from the large chains during the 2022 run.
30

===== PAGE 34 =====

Table 4: Relation between offshore and U.S.-based stablecoin flows during May 2022.
(1) (2) (3)
US-Based Inflows
Offshore Outflows 0.408 ∗∗∗ 0.416∗∗ -1.174∗∗
(3.58) (3.64) (-2.78)
Constant -0.015 -0.015 0.006
(-1.46) (-0.44) (1.23)
Blockchain Size All Large Small
Sample (2022 Run) 5/8/22-5/16/22 5/8/22-5/16/22 5/8/22-5/16/22
𝑁 63 18 45
𝑅2 0.600 0.616 0.536
Note: This table reports the coefficients from regressing aggregate inflows into US-based stablecoins on aggregate
outflows from offshore stablecoins during the May 2022 run for the subset of blockchains covered by DefiLlama
during all days of the run. This excludes Terra, Solana, and Tron, for which DefiLlama only provides data starting on
May 12, 2022. The three columns show the results, respectively, of aggregate flows across all 7 blockchains in the
sample, large blockchains—with a circulation $10 billion or greater (Ethereum and Binance Smart Chain), and small
blockchains—withacirculationbelow$10billion(Arbitrum,Avalanche,Fantom,Optimism,andPolygon).t-statistics,
based on standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity, are in parentheses. ***, **, and * represent 1%, 5%, and 10%
statistical significance.
Table 5: Relation between offshore and U.S.-based stablecoin flows during March 2023.
(1) (2) (3)
Offshore Inflows
US-Based Outflows 0.237 ∗∗∗ 0.218∗∗∗ -0.038
(15.01) (10.76) (-0.93)
Constant 0.011 0.055 -0.001
(1.02) (1.41) (-0.88)
Blockchain Size All Large Small
Sample (2023 Run) 3/9/23-3/12/23 3/9/23-3/12/23 3/9/23-3/12/23
𝑁 40 12 28
𝑅2 0.702 0.684 0.036
Note:ThistableshowstheresultsfromregressingaggregateoutflowsfromUS-basedstablecoinsonaggregateinflows
into offshore stablecoins during the March 2023 run using data from DefiLlama. The three columns show the results,
respectively, of aggregate flows across all 10 blockchains, large blockchains (Ethereum, Tron, and Binance Smart
Chain), and small blockchains (Arbitrum, Avalanche, Fantom, Optimism, Polygon, Solana, and Terra). t-statistics,
based on standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity, are in parentheses. ***, **, and * represent 1%, 5%, and 10%
statistical significance.
31

===== PAGE 35 =====

Figure 11: Run dynamics: Flows from offshore to U.S.-based stablecoins vs. flows from prime to
government MMFs
Alt text: four scatterplots with regression lines showing the correlation between flows to different
types of MMFs or stablecoins.
(a) MMFs, 2020 run
 (b) Aggregate Stablecoins 2022
(c) Large Blockchains, 2022 run
 (d) Small Blockchains, 2022 run
Note:Panel(a)showsintra-familyflowsamongMMFsinMarch2020,Panel(b)showsdailyaggregateintra-
industrystablecoinflowsovertheMay8–16,2022,periodandPanels(c)and(d)showdailyintra-blockchain
stablecoin flows on large and small blockchains, respectively, over the May 8–16, 2022, period. Large
blockchains are Ethereum and Binance Smart Chain (BSC). Small blockchains are Arbitrum, Avalanche,
Fantom, Optimism, and Polygon. Source: DefiLlama.
32

===== PAGE 36 =====

Figure 12: Flows from offshore to U.S.-based stablecoins during March 2023
Alt text: two scatterplots with regression lines showing the correlation between flows to different
types of stablecoins.
(a) Large Blockchains, 2023 run
 (b) Small Blockchains, 2023 run
Note: Daily intra-blockchain stablecoin flows on large and small blockchains, respectively, over the March
9–12, 2023, period. Large blockchains are Ethereum, Binance Smart Chain (BSC), and Tron. Small
blockchains are Arbitrum, Avalanche, Fantom, Optimism, Polygon, Solana, Terra. Source: DefiLlama.
5 Conclusion
While flight-to-safety dynamics in money market funds have been extensively documented in
the literature—with money flowing from the riskier prime segment of the industry to the safer
governmentsegment—muchlessisknownabouttheextenttowhichsuchdynamicsarealsoatplay
among stablecoins. In this paper, we bridge this gap by showing that flight-to-safety dynamics in
stablecoins resemble those in the MMF industry. During periods of stress in crypto markets, safer
stablecoins experience net inflows, while riskier ones suffer net outflows. This pattern is present
not only on average, but also during specific periods of acute market stress, such as the 2022 run
on TerraUSD, which spilled over into similarly risky stablecoins, and the 2023 collapse of Silicon
Valley Bank, which spilled over into stablecoins exposed to the failing bank.
We also show that flight-to-safety flows across stablecoins tend to occur within the same
blockchain,similarlytohowflight-to-safetyflowsacrossMMFsoccurwithinthesamefundfamily.
This resemblance, however, is absent among small blockchains, which generally suffered overall
outflows during stress episodes as investors seemed to deem the entire chains as more risky.
33

===== PAGE 37 =====

Ourfindingsdemonstratethatstablecoinsarevulnerabletorunsduringperiodsofbroadcrypto
market dislocation as well as idiosyncratic stress events. Should stablecoins continue to grow
and become more interconnected with mainstream financial markets, such as short-term funding
markets, they could become a source of financial instability for the broader financial system.
34

===== PAGE 38 =====

References
Adams,A.,Ibert,M.,2022. Runsonalgorithmicstablecoins:EvidencefromIron,Titan,andSteel.
Finance and Economics Discussion Series Notes.
Agur,I.,Ari,A.,Dell’Ariccia,G.,2022.Designingcentralbankdigitalcurrencies.JournalofMone-
taryEconomics125,62–79. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0304393221000520, doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmoneco.2021.05.002.
Anadu, K., Sanders, S., 2021. Money market mutual funds: Runs, emergency liquidity facilities,
and potential reforms. Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Notes.
Arner,D.,Auer,R.,Frost,J.,2020. Stablecoins:risks,potentialandregulation. BISWorkingPaper
No. 905, available athttps://www.bis.org/publ/work905.pdf.
Azar, P.D., Baughman, G., Carapella, F., Gerszten, J., Lubis, A., Perez-Sangimino, J.P., Scotti, C.,
Swem, N., Vardoulakis, A., Rappoport W, D.E., 2022. The financial stability implications of
digital assets. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 2022-058.
Berg, T., Keil, J., Martini, F., Puri, M., 2023. Cbdcs, payment firms, and geopolitics. URL:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=4402740. SSRN working paper No. 4402740.
Bertsch, C., 2023. Stablecoins: Adoption and fragility. Sveriges Riksbank Working Paper Series,
2023. Available on SSRN:https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=
4466431.
Bouveret, A., Martin, A., McCabe, P.E., 2022. Money market fund vulnerabilities: A global
perspective. FRB of New York Staff Report 1009.
Carter, N., Harris, H., Khosrowshahi, W., Ambrose, C., Johnson, P., Trachtman, R., Yim, A.,
2024. Stablecoins: The emerging market story. https://castleisland.vc/writing/
stablecoins-the-emerging-market-story.
35

===== PAGE 39 =====

Chernenko, S., Sunderam, A., 2014. Frictions in shadow banking: Evidence from the lending
behavior of money market mutual funds. Review of Financial Studies 27, 1717–1750.
Cipriani, M., La Spada, G., 2020. Sophisticated and unsophisticated runs. FRB of New York Staff
Report .
Cipriani, M., La Spada, G., 2021. Investors’ appetite for money-like assets: The MMF industry
after the 2014 regulatory reform. Journal of Financial Economics 140, 250–269.
Circle, 2023. An update on USDC & Silicon Valley Bank. Circle Blog.
d’Avernas,A.,Maurin,V.,Vandeweyer,Q.,2022. Canstablecoinsbestable? UniversityofChicago,
Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working Paper .
DiMaggio,M.,Ghosh,P.,Ghosh,S.K.,Wu,A.,2024. ImpactofRetailCBDConDigitalPayments,
and Bank Deposits: Evidence from India. Working Paper 32457. National Bureau of Economic
Research. URL:http://www.nber.org/papers/w32457, doi:10.3386/w32457.
Drechsler,I.,Savov,A.,Schnabl,P.,2024. Depositfranchiseruns. NBERworkingpaperno.31138.
Duygan-Bump,B.,Parkinson,P.,Rosengren,E.,Suarez,G.A.,Willen,P.,2013. Howeffectivewere
theFederalReserveemergencyliquidityfacilities?EvidencefromtheAsset-BackedCommercial
Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility. Journal of Finance 68, 715–737.
FederalReserveBoard,2022. Financialstabilityreport. BoardofGovernorsoftheFederalReserve
System.
Financial Stability Board, 2024. Thematic review on money
market fund reforms. https://www.fsb.org/2024/02/
thematic-review-on-money-market-fund-reforms-peer-review-report/.
Frost, J., Shin, H.S., Wierts, P., 2020. An early stablecoin? the bank of amsterdam and the
governance of money. BIS Working Paper No. 902.
36

===== PAGE 40 =====

Gallagher,E.A.,Schmidt,L.D.,Timmermann,A.,Wermers,R.,2020. Investorinformationacqui-
sition and money market fund risk rebalancing during the 2011–2012 Eurozone crisis. Review
of Financial Studies 33, 1445–1483.
Gissler, S., Macchiavelli, M., Narajabad, B., 2021. Providing safety in a rush: How did shadow
banks respond to a $1 trillion shock. Social Science Research Network Working Paper.https:
//ssrn.com/abstract=3595417.
Gorton,G.B.,Klee,E.C.,Ross,C.P.,Ross,S.Y.,Vardoulakis,A.P.,2022a. Leverageandstablecoin
pegs. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series No. 30796.
Gorton,G.B.,Ross,C.P.,Ross,S.Y.,2022b.Makingmoney.NationalBureauofEconomicResearch
Working Paper Series.
Gorton,G.B.,Zhang,J.,2021. Tamingwildcatstablecoins. UniversityofChicagoLawReview90.
Hoang, L.T., Baur, D.G., 2021. How stable are stablecoins? European Journal of Finance 234,
1–17.
Ivashina,V.,Scharfstein,D.S.,Stein,J.C.,2015. Dollarfundingandthelendingbehaviorofglobal
banks. Quarterly Journal of Economics 130, 1241–1281.
Jasperse, J., Hammer, S., 2024. The State of Stablecoin Regulation and Emergence of Global
Principles. Business Law Today. American Bar Association.
Jordà, Ò., 2005. Estimation and inference of impulse responses by local projections. American
Economic Review 95, 161–182.
Kacperczyk, M., Schnabl, P., 2013. How safe are money market funds? Quarterly Journal of
Economics 128, 1073–1122.
Kozhan, R., Viswanath-Natraj, G., 2021. Decentralized stablecoins and collateral risk. WBS
Finance Group Research Paper .
37

===== PAGE 41 =====

Li, L., Li, Y., Macchiavelli, M., Zhou, X., 2021. Liquidity restrictions, runs, and central bank
interventions:Evidencefrommoneymarketfunds. ReviewofFinancialStudies34,5402–5437.
Li, Y., Mayer, S., 2022. Money creation in decentralized finance: A dynamic model of stablecoin
andcryptoshadowbanking.AvailableonSSRN: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=3757083.
Liu, J., Makarov, I., Schoar, A., 2023. Anatomy of a run: The Terra Luna crash. National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper Series No. 31160.
Lyons, R.K., Viswanath-Natraj, G., 2023. What keeps stablecoins stable? Journal of International
Money and Finance 131.
Ma, Y., Zeng, Y., Zhang, A.L., 2023. Stablecoin runs and the centralization of arbitrage. Social
Science Research Network Working Paper.https://ssrn.com/abstract=4398546.
McCabe, P.E., 2010. The cross section of money market fund risks and financial crises. FEDS
Working Paper.
MontielOlea,J.,Plagborg-Møller,M.,2021. Localprojectioninferenceissimplerandmorerobust
than you think. American Economic Review 89, 1789–1823.
Nakamoto, S., 2008. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Decentralized Business
Review , 21260.
Oefele, N., Baur, D.G., Smales, L.A., 2024. Flight-to-quality—money market mutual funds and
stablecoins during the march 2023 banking crisis. Economics Letters 234.
PWG, 2020. Overview of recent events and potential reform options for money market funds.
President’s Working Group on Financial Markets, US Department of the Treasury.
PWG, 2021. Report on stablecoins. President’s Working Group on Financial Markets, US Depart-
ment of the Treasury.
38

===== PAGE 42 =====

Rosengren,E.S.,2021. Financialstability. RemarksatOfficialMonetaryandFinancialInstitutions
Forum (Fed Week).
Uhlig, H., 2022. A luna-tic stablecoin crash. NBER working paper No. 30256.
39

===== PAGE 43 =====

A Appendix: Stability Mechanisms
In this section, we describe the stablecoins that comprise our data and explain the mechanisms
through which most stablecoins maintain their peg. Because of the permissionless nature of
blockchaintechnology,therehavebeenmanydifferentattemptstocreatestablecoins,withvarying
degrees of success. Our data set contains stablecoin data on 12 stablecoins, which we describe
roughly in order of highest to lowest average market capitalization in early 2022, before the Ter-
raUSD crash. Taken together, BUSD, USDC, USDP, USDT, TUSD, FRAX, USTC, DAI, LUSD,
and MIM comprised more than 99 percent of the total market capitalization in early 2022. BUSD,
USDC, USDP, GUSD, USDT, TUSD, USDD, FRAX, DAI, and LUSD comprised more than 99
percent of the total market capitalization in early 2023.31
A.1 Tether (USDT)
Tetherwaslaunchedin2014byaHongKong–basedcompanycallediFinex,whichisalsotheowner
of Bitfinex, a large crypto exchange. At launch, Tether promised that each unit of stablecoin issued
would be backed by $1 held in a bank account. Tether has revised the specifics of this promise
several times starting in 2019; Figure A.1 shows that Tether claimed it was backed by traditional
currency in February 2019 but by April 2019 changed its disclosure to state that Tether is backed
by a mixture of assets.
TableA.1showsTether’sassetsaccordingtoitsMay2022attestation. 32 InMarch2022,Tether
had$82.26 billionin liabilitiesand$82.42 billionworthof assets.The assetswere$20.1 billionof
commercial paper, $39.2 billion of Treasury securities, $6.8 billion of money market funds shares,
$3.1 billion of secured loans, $3.7 billion worth of corporate bonds, mutual funds and precious
metals, and $4.9 billion worth of other investments, including other crypto assets.
31These are the same 10 stablecoins as in the 2022 analysis, except USTC and MIM were overtaken by GUSD and
USDD when ranking stablecoins by market capitalization.
32https://assets.ctfassets.net/vyse88cgwfbl/1np5dpcwuHrWJ4AgUgI3Vn/
07fcaeb1cd7ce6df71ce8f5abb09ddb7/Tether_Assurance_Consolidated_Reserves_Report_
2022-03-31__1_.pdf
40

===== PAGE 44 =====

Figure A.1: Comparison of Tether disclosures from February 2019 and April 2019
Alt text: Two screenshots from Tether disclosures.
(a)Tether disclosure from February 2019
 (b)Tether disclosure from April 2019
Source: Internet Archive snapshots of Tether homepage (February; April).
Note:ThedisclosurefromFebruary2019assertsthateveryTetherisbackedbytraditionalcurrency,whilethedisclosure
from April 2019 states that Tether is backed by a mixture of assets.
Onmanyoccasions,Tetherhastradedbelowitsone-to-onepegwiththedollar,butithasalways
recoveredtoparity.Nevertheless,becauseitisbackedbyriskyassetsandlackstransparency,Tether
is perceived as subject to a large degree of run risk.
A.2 USD Coin (USDC)
USD Coin (USDC) was launched in 2018 by Circle, a company based in Massachusetts. It is
operated by a consortium of companies called Centre, which includes Circle and Coinbase. Like
Tether,USDCmaintainsitspegbybackingitscoinwithfinancialassets;butunlikeTether,itinvests
mainly in safe government assets. For instance, according to USDC’s attestation reports,33 in July
2022, there were 54.6 billion USDC units in circulation, backed by $54.7 billion of assets, 22.4
percent held in cash and 77.6 percent held in short-term Treasury securities. USDC has money
transmitter licenses in multiple US states and the District of Columbia, and regularly publishes
attestations of their assets.
33https://www.circle.com/en/transparency
41

===== PAGE 45 =====

Table A.1: Tether balance sheet according to its May 2022 attestation
Asset Type Billions of Dollars Share of Assets (%)
Commercial Paper 20.1 24.4
US Treasuries 39.2 47.6
Money Market Funds 6.8 8.3
Secured Loans 3.1 3.8
Corporate Bonds, Funds and Precious Metals 3.7 4.5
Other Investments, Including Cryptocurrencies 4.9 5.9
Total Assets 82.42
Total Liabilities 82.26
Even though USDC is backed by cash and short-term Treasury securities, it is still runnable.
In particular, its liabilities are not eligible for FDIC insurance; therefore, a run on USDC does not
necessarilyhavetheusualdampenersasananalogousrunonaUSbank.Thisprovedtobethecase
inMarch2023,wheninvestorsranonUSDCafterobservingthat8percentofthestablecoin’sassets
were at risk in the Silicon Valley Bank collapse. Within hours, USDC’s price crashed to $0.88,
and its market capitalization declined by $7.9 billion, 18 percent of its market capitalization at the
beginningoftheday. 34Onlyafterregulatorsextendedprotectionbeyondthe$250,000caponFDIC
deposit insurance did market participants regain enough confidence in USDC for the stablecoin to
regain its peg.
A.3 Binance USD (BUSD)
Thethird-largeststablecoinin2022wasBinanceUSD(BUSD),issuedbyacompanycalledPaxos,
whichisbasedinNewYorkStateandthereforeregulatedbytheNewYorkDepartmentofFinancial
Services(NYDFS).AsofFebruary21,2023,PaxosstoppedissuingBUSDatNYDFS’sdirection.
According to the Paxos website,35 BUSD can still be redeemed for USD or exchanged for USDP,
34This price reflects secondary market transactions. As explained earlier, in addition to secondary market transac-
tions,someinvestorsmayredeemorpurchasetokensdirectlywiththeSCissuer(thatis,primarymarkettransactions.)
We do not know if any UDSC tokens were redeemed for less than $1 in the primary market during this time.
35https://paxos.com/2023/02/13/paxos-will-halt-minting-new-busd-tokens/
42

===== PAGE 46 =====

another stablecoin issued by Paxos, and Paxos will fully collateralize BUSD with safe assets such
as cash, US Treasury bills, and overnight reverse repos indefinitely.
A.4 TerraUSD (UST)
TerraUSD(UST)isanalgorithmicstablecoinandwasthefourth-largeststablecoinuptoMay2022,
when it suffered a run. In contrast to asset-backed or crypto-collateralized stablecoins, algorithmic
stablecoinsarenotbackedbyafinancialasset.Rather,theirpegismaintainedthroughanalgorithmic
mechanism.
In the TerraUSD stablecoin mechanism, there are two tokens: TerraUSD, which is designed to
be stable, and Luna, a crypto asset similar to Bitcoin whose value fluctuates over time but which,
in contrast to Bitcoin, can be minted in an unlimited amount. Any investors with a node in the
Terra blockchain has access to a smart contract, which allows them to create or redeem one unit of
TerraUSD for $1 worth of Luna; for instance, if the price of Luna is $10, the smart contract will
exchange one TerraUSD for 0.1 unit of Luna. Arbitrage should keep the value of TerraUSD stable
at $1 as long as the price of Luna is greater than $0.
There are several reasons why such a system may be unstable, including:
1. LimitstoArbitrage:TherearecoststorunninganodeontheTerrablockchain,andnotevery
investor runs a node.
2. Positive Feedback Loop: As the price of Luna decreases, any redemption of TerraUSD will
increase the supply of Luna by larger and larger amounts. For instance, if Luna trades at
$0.01, then redeeming one unit of TerraUSD will create 100 units of Luna. As TerraUSD
crashed, the supply of LUNA increased from 365 million units on May 9 to more than 6
trillion units by May 13.
3. Multiple Equilibria: The mechanism for stabilizing TerraUSD’s price has two equilibria: If
investors believe Luna will trade for a positive price, then TerraUSD will trade for $1; but if
investors expect the price of Luna to be $0, then the price of TerraUSD will also be $0.
43

===== PAGE 47 =====

Indeed, the limits of theTerraUSD algorithm became apparent in May 2022, when the priceof
both TerraUSD and Luna crashed close to $0.
A.5 Dai (DAI)
DAI is issued by MakerDAO, a so-called distributed autonomous organization (DAO) established
in 2014. MakerDAO launched two tokens, DAI and Maker (MKR), in 2017 on the Ethereum
blockchain.TheMKRtokenisagovernancetoken,withMKRholdersabletovoteontheparameters
thatdeterminethebehavioroftheDAIstablecoin;investorscanbuyandsellMKRinanexchange.
That is, MakerDAO is similar to a company with no board of directors whose decisions are made
directly by equity holders (that is, the holders of MKR).
TheDAItokenisacrypto-collateralizedstablecoin.NewunitsofDAIaremintedandredeemed
through smart contracts called vaults. A user can mint new DAI by creating a vault and depositing
collateralinit.Thereareseveraltypesofvaults,eachspecifyingtheminimumcollateralneededto
issueaunitofDAI.EachtypeofvaultisestablishedthroughavotebyMKRowners.Thecollateral
can be Ethereum, Bitcoin, other crypto assets including stablecoins, and increasingly “real world
assets” such as tokenized mortgages.
For instance, a user who creates a vault of type ETH-A would deposit at least $145 worth of
Ethereum and generate 100 units of DAI. If the peg holds so that 1 DAI is worth $1 on secondary
markets, then this would generate $100 worth of DAI. The user can use the DAI they minted to
investincryptoassetsorDFprotocolsontheEthereumblockchain.NotethatalthoughDAIcanbe
created through different vault type, once created, they are all fungible and can be traded freely on
secondary markets.
A user who mints DAI has effectively borrowed it from the system through a collateralized
loan. To recover their collateral, the user needs to repay the DAI back to the vault smart contract,
together with an interest rate, also specified for each vault type by the holders of MKR. As we will
see below, the proceeds from this interest rate contribute to a stability buffer.
44

===== PAGE 48 =====

When DAI is backed by volatile assets, it is usually overcollateralized. If the value of the
collateraldropsbelowtheminimumcollateralspecifiedbythevaulttype($145worthofEthereum
for$100worthofDAIinthepreviousexample),thenthecollateralcanbeliquidatedviaanauction.
Any holder of DAI can start the auction and would get a fee for doing so. The winner of the
auctionwouldreceivethecollateralinexchangefortheirDAIholdings.Theuserwhodepositedthe
collateral would need to deposit more Ethereum to avoid the liquidation. As long as the collateral
value in each vault is above 100 percent, then the peg of DAI will be maintained because any DAI
holder is better off participating in the auctions than selling DAI at a price below $1.
DAI’s smart contract has the following properties:
• Issuance: Any user can send collateral (in the form of Bitcoin, Ethereum, or other allowed
assets) and receive newly minted units of DAI at the price of $1. The collateral gets crypto-
graphically locked by the smart contract into a vault, which is associated with the user who
minted the DAI.
• Use: A user who has minted DAI can proceed to use it to buy other crypto assets or loan the
DAI in a decentralized finance protocol and earn higher yield. A popular use case is using
DAI to take a leveraged position on ETH. For instance, a user may use $150 worth of ETH
collateral to mint $100 worth of DAI. Then, the user proceeds to buy $100 worth of ETH
with their newly minted DAI. This gives the user a $250 position on ETH using an initial
capital of $150, amplifying returns by a factor of5
3. Users can repeat this cycle to amplify
their total returns by a factor of 3.
• Redemption:Conversely,anyuserwhohadmintedDAIcanredeemitbyreturningtheirunits
andreceivingbackthecollateralminusaredemptionfee.Itisimportanttonotethatonlythe
user who minted the DAI associated with a particular vault can redeem the collateral in that
vault.
• Liquidation: If the value of the collateral in a vault drops below a certain threshold, then
any user can trigger an auction. Any DAI holder can bid in the auction for the collateral. All
45

===== PAGE 49 =====

bids are denominated in DAI; the winning bidder obtains the assets backing DAI, and the
equivalent amount of stablecoins is destroyed.
NotethatthemechanismoutlinedaboveallowsanarbitrageurtoprofitifDAItradesoutsidethe
[ 1
1.45, 1.45] interval. If DAI traded above $1.45, then a user could buy $1.45 worth of Ethereum,
use it as collateral to generate one unit of DAI, and sell the DAI for more than $1.45, obtaining a
risklessprofit.IfDAItradedbelow 1
1.45,thenthearbitrageurcouldshortoneunitofDAI,buy$ 1
1.45
worthofEthereum,anduseittogenerateoneunitofDAItorepaytheirshort.Whiletheparameters
in this specific example does not guarantee a very tight peg, there are alternative mechanisms that
keep the peg in a much more narrow band.
• Savings Rate: DAI provides a DAI savings rate—essentially a deposit rate—which can be
raised when the price of DAI is low and lowered when the price of DAI is high.
• Stability Fees: Users who mint DAI will continuously pay a stability fee—essentially a
borrowing rate—until they redeem their DAI. When the stability fee is high, it incentivizes
userstoredeemtheirDAIandtakestablecoinsoutofcirculation,increasingthepriceofDAI.
Conversely, lower stability fees encourage the creation of new DAI, reducing the price.
• MultipleTypesofCollateral:InadditiontotheearlierEthereumexample,thereareothertypes
of collateral with different collateralization ratios. Many of these other types of collateral
are asset-backed stablecoins, with collateralization ratios around 100 percent, allowing for
a tighter peg. Note that this implies that DAI’s peg is linked to the stability of asset-backed
stablecoins.
• Besides all these mechanisms, DAI also has a peg stability module, which allows users to
exchangeDAIforUSDCoinata1:1ratio—withoutlockinganycollateral.Thisisinaddition
to using other asset-backed stablecoins like Paxos as collateral. Thus, the value of DAI is
intrinsically linked to the value of USD Coin and other US-based stablecoins.
46

===== PAGE 50 =====

A.6 Magic Internet Money (MIM)
MagicInternetMoney(MIM)isacrypto-collateralizedstablecointhatusesinterest-bearingcrypto-
asset derivatives as collateral. It was launched in 2021 and operates on the Ethereum blockchain.
Like DAI, MIM is crypto-collateralized: Any user can mint new MIM by depositing collateral in
a smart contract called a cauldron and can redeem MIM by returning it to the smart contract and
reclaimingthecollateral.Theparametersgoverningthebehaviorofcauldronsaredeterminedusing
a governance token called SPELL, which is analogous to MakerDAO’s MKR.
IncontrasttoDAI,wheremostofthecrypto-collateralusedisastandardcryptoassetlikeETH,
most of the crypto-collateral in the MIM protocol is in the form of interest-yielding tokens issued
by other decentralized finance protocols. In this way, MIM adds another layer of complexity and
potential instability to the decentralized finance ecosystem.
A.7 TrueUSD (TUSD)
TrueUSD is an asset-backed stablecoin originally issued by TrustToken, a company based in San
Francisco, and whose reserves were stored in the United States.36 In 2020, the TUSD brand was
sold to Techteryx, an Asian conglomerate based in China37. After this transfer, the collateral was
held at a variety of banks, including in the United States, the Bahamas, and Hong Kong, making
TUSD transition from US-based to Offshore.38
A.8 Frax (FRAX)
Frax was launched in 2020 and follows a hybrid design. In its original incarnation—Version 1—
Frax was partially collateralized by USDC and partially collateralized by Frax Shares (FXS), a
36In an attestation from 2018 (https://trusttokenteam.medium.com/nov30-b4261325c468), the issuing
company attests that the collateral funds are held by two escrow agents in the United States.
37https://trueusd.medium.com/scaling-trust-announcing-tusds-next-stage-of-growth-f1fb58d62b
38https://trueusd.medium.com/trueusd-attestations-49092b7cb500
47

===== PAGE 51 =====

free-floating token like LUNA. Version 2 is collateralized by a wider variety of assets, including
tokens representing ownership shares of decentralized exchange contracts where FRAX is traded.
FraxVersion1. ThekeystatevariableinFRAXVersion1isthecollateralratio 𝜌∈[ 0, 1].Given
a collateral ratio of𝜌, a unit of FRAX can be minted by depositing𝜌 units of USDC and(1−𝜌)
dollars worth of FXS into a smart contract. In the other direction, a user can redeem a unit of
FRAXviathissmartcontractandreceive 𝜌unitsofUSDCand (1−𝜌) unitsofFXS.Thecollateral
ratio can be increased or decreased if certain conditions are met. For example, if FRAX is trading
above $1, then the collateral ratio can be decreased so that less USDC collateral is needed to mint
one unit of FRAX. If FRAX is trading below $1, then the collateral ratio can be increased. This
makes it more difficult to mint new units of FRAX and increases the incentive to redeem existing
units(byprovidingmoreUSDCwhenFRAXunitsareredeemed).Thesecollateralchangescanbe
triggeredbyanyuserwhocallsthecorrespondingfunctionsintheFRAXsmartcontract.However,
thesefunctionscanonlybecalledifthecorrespondingpriceconditions(FRAXabove$1orFRAX
below $1) are met.
FRAXVersion2. ThemaindistinctionbetweenFRAXVersion1andVersion2isthatVersion2
reliesonawidearrayofcryptoassetsasthebackingcollateral.However,thereareotherimportant
distinctions that increase its interconnections with the rest of the crypto ecosystem:
1. Since multiple tokens can be used as collateral, it is possible that the value of the collateral
is above or below 100 percent. If the value of collateral is above 100 percent, there is a
functioninthesmartcontract—calledFXS1559—allowingsomeFXSunitstoberedeemed
for collateral.
2. The protocol rehypothecates some of the USDC collateral by investing it in decentralized
finance protocols such as Aave, Compound, and Yearn.
3. The protocol also rehypothecates USDC collateral by placing it in the Curve or Uniswap
decentralized exchanges.
48

===== PAGE 52 =====

4. New FRAX can be minted by borrowing it using collateral, in a similar way that DAI is
minted.
A.9 Pax Dollar (USDP)
Paxosissuesanotherstablecoin,PaxDollar(USDP),whichwastheninth-largeststablecoininApril
2022. Like BUSD, USDP is backed by cash, US Treasury bills, and overnight reverse repos.
A.10 Liquity USD (LUSD)
Liquity USD (LUSD) is another crypto-collateralized stablecoin that operates on the Ethereum
platform.IncontrastwithDAIandMIM,LUSDsmartcontractsonlyacceptEthereumascollateral
and do not charge an interest rate. Instead, there is a one-time fee at the time of borrowing. The
collateral ratio needed to generate LUSD is 110 percent.
A.11 Gemini Dollar (GUSD)
Like BUSD, Gemini Dollar (GUSD) is an exchange-branded token that is issued and custodied
by Paxos. Like BUSD and USDP, the funds used to back GUSD are custodied in US financial
institutions.
A.12 Decentralized USD (USDD)
USDD is an algorithmic stablecoin backed by several tokens, including Tron (TRX), USDT, and
USDC. USDD trades on the TRON blockchain and was introduced in May 2022. Like FRAX,
USDD is a hybrid stablecoin. It has an algorithmic mechanism that allows users to exchange one
unit of USDD for $1 worth of TRX at any time. In addition, it is backed by a peg stability module
(PSM) holding reserves of USDT and USDC, allowing users to exchange one unit of USDD for
one unit of USDT or USDC.
49

===== PAGE 53 =====

USDD has broken its peg multiple times, including in May and June 2022, and March 2023,
but has recovered its peg since then.
B Appendix: Regression Tables
B.1 Local projections: regression results and robustness checks
Table B.2 reports the coefficient estimates corresponding to the plots in Figure 6. The bottom six
rows of Table B.2 report the𝑝-values from𝐹 tests for the difference across the coefficients. For
instance,in the“ℎ=1”column, the𝑝-valuefor “US ≠Algo”is 0.032,indicating thatthedifference
innetflowsbetweenUS-basedstablecoinsandalgorithmicstablecoinsonedayafteraBitcoinprice
shock is significant at the 5 percent level. These test results, taken together with the divergent sign
of the point estimates (positive flows for US-based stablecoins and negative for the rest), indicate
that the flows to U.S.-based stablecoins are qualitatively and significantly different.
InadditiontoourmainspecificationreportedinTableB.2,werunanumberofrobustnesschecks.
The first one concerns the number of lags, which are included to control for serial correlation in
both the dependent and independent variables. To choose the optimal number of lags, we follow
a procedure suggested in Jordà (2005) and Montiel Olea and Plagborg-Møller (2021). We run a
vector autoregression (VAR) for the

Flow𝑖,𝑡,Shock𝑖,𝑡

vector for each stablecoin𝑖. We estimate
the VAR with𝑝 ={1, 2, 3,..., 31} lags (to allow for monthly seasonality) and choose the optimal
number of lags based on an information criterion (IC). We use the Akaike IC (AIC), and the
BayesianIC(BIC),whichinpracticeagreeforeverystablecoin.Fornineoutoftwelvestablecoins,
the IC indicates two lags as the optimal number. We choose this as our main specification under
the parsimonious assumption that the optimal lag length for all stablecoins is the same.
Fortheotherthreestablecoins,theICpointstomuchlongerlags(14,30,and30).Furthermore,
Montiel Olea and Plagborg-Møller (2021) suggest that the VAR lag length𝑝 should be chosen
“conservatively ... there is no asymptotic efficiency cost of controlling for more than𝑝0 lags if the
50

===== PAGE 54 =====

Table B.2:
Local projection estimates of stablecoin cumulative flow on Bitcoin shock (value-weighted)
Dependent Var
iable: Cumulative Percent Outflowsℎ Days After Shock
ℎ = 0 ℎ = 1 ℎ =
2 ℎ = 3 ℎ = 4 ℎ = 5 ℎ = 6 ℎ = 7 ℎ = 8
US-Based -0.04 0.10
0.49 0.71 ∗ 1.03∗∗ 1.29∗∗∗ 1.45∗∗∗ 1.67∗∗∗ 1.88∗∗∗
(-0.46) (0.60) (1.59) (2.07) (2.80) (3.21) (3.87) (3.63) (3.57)
Offshore -0.03 -0.13 -0.27 -0.54 -0.64 -0.82 -0.92 -1.04 -1.07
(-0.85) (-0.54) (-0.91) (-1.05) (-1.23) (-1.37) (-1.73) (-1.65) (-1.54)
Algorithmic -1.76∗ -3.18∗∗ -5.68∗∗ -6.02∗∗ -5.60∗∗ -6.53∗∗ -8.58∗∗∗ -8.54∗∗∗ -9.18∗∗∗
(-1.95) (-2.57) (-2.99) (-2.83) (-2.54) (-2.88) (-3.42) (-3.12) (-3.20)
Crypto-Collateralized -2.02 ∗∗∗ -2.52∗∗∗ -3.13∗∗ -2.70∗ -3.00∗∗ -2.78∗ -2.90∗ -3.27∗ -3.02∗
(-3.33) (-3.20) (-2.69) (-2.16) (-2.37) (-2.08) (-1.81) (-1.89) (-1.80)
Coin FE Y Y
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
N. Obs. 8,676
8,676 8,676 8,676 8,676 8,676 8,676 8,676 8,676
Adj.𝑅2 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.09
𝑝: US≠Offshore 0.940
0.524 0.162 0.116 0.067 0.050 0.018 0.022 0.029
𝑝: US≠Algo 0.098 0.032 0.013 0.016 0.024 0.012 0.004 0.008 0.007
𝑝: US≠Crypto 0.007 0.009 0.019 0.042 0.027 0.032 0.042 0.039 0.043
𝑝: Offshore≠Algo 0.080 0.013 0.009 0.008 0.017 0.006 0.003 0.005 0.004
𝑝: Offshore≠Crypto 0.007 0.005 0.024 0.051 0.039 0.040 0.112 0.086 0.094
𝑝: Algo≠Crypto 0.763 0.403 0.019 0.007 0.043 0.004 0.000 0.000 0.000
Note: This
table reports selected coefficient estimates from Equation (1) representing the cumulative flow impulse response function for
US-based(𝛽1
0),offshoreasset-backed( 𝛽2
0),crypto-backed( 𝛽3
0),andalgorithmic( 𝛽4
0)stablecoins.Observationsareweightedbypre-event
marketcapitalization.Allregressionsincludecoinfixedeffects.Standarderrorsareclusteredatthecoinanddatelevel.T-statisticsarein
parentheses. Stars indicate statistical significance at the 10% (*), 5% (**), and 1% (***) levels.
51

===== PAGE 55 =====

true model is a VAR(𝑝0).” Montiel Olea and Plagborg-Møller (2021) also suggest using simple
robuststandarderrorsinsteadofclusteredstandarderrors.Thus,inTableB.3,wereporttheresults
of a specification analogous to Equation (1), but including 31 daily lags and using robust standard
errors. The point estimates are essentially identical and more statistically significant.
In unreported results, we estimate every combination of robust and clustered standard errors
with 1, 2, 3, 7, 14, and 31 daily lags. None of the point estimates are materially different from
the reported ones, and the statistical significance remains for almost all coefficients in almost all
specifications.
52

===== PAGE 56 =====

Table B.3:
Local projection estimates of stablecoin cumulative flow on Bitcoin shock: Longer lags
Dependent Var
iable: Cumulative Percent Outflowsℎ Days After Shock
ℎ = 0 ℎ = 1 ℎ =
2 ℎ = 3 ℎ = 4 ℎ = 5 ℎ = 6 ℎ = 7 ℎ = 8
US-Based -0.05 0.06
0.39 0.58 ∗ 0.86∗∗ 1.02∗∗ 1.19∗∗ 1.36∗∗ 1.52∗∗
(-0.25) (0.22) (1.36) (1.72) (2.08) (2.07) (2.10) (2.23) (2.28)
Offshore -0.05 -0.16 -0.34 -0.71 ∗∗ -0.85∗∗ -1.09∗∗ -1.24∗∗ -1.42∗∗ -1.50∗∗
(-0.77) (-0.85) (-1.54) (-2.04) (-2.07) (-2.25) (-2.42) (-2.57) (-2.45)
Algorithmic -2.64∗ -4.12∗∗ -6.75∗∗ -6.91∗∗ -6.71∗∗ -7.56∗∗ -9.85∗∗∗ -9.82∗∗ -10.45∗∗∗
(-1.84) (-2.43) (-2.53) (-2.33) (-2.15) (-2.37) (-2.77) (-2.52) (-2.59)
Crypto-Collateralized -2.06 ∗∗∗ -2.56∗∗∗ -3.31∗∗∗ -3.01∗∗∗ -3.46∗∗∗ -3.40∗∗∗ -3.75∗∗∗ -4.24∗∗∗ -4.08∗∗∗
(-4.60) (-4.38) (-4.39) (-3.13) (-3.33) (-3.16) (-3.30) (-3.65) (-3.46)
Coin FE Y Y
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
N. Obs. 8,426
8,426 8,426 8,426 8,426 8,426 8,426 8,426 8,426
Adj.𝑅2 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.17 0.17 0.18 0.19 0.19 0.19
𝑝: US≠Offshore 0.990
0.486 0.044 0.008 0.003 0.002 0.001 0.001 0.001
𝑝: US≠Algo 0.073 0.015 0.008 0.012 0.016 0.008 0.002 0.005 0.003
𝑝: US≠Crypto 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000
𝑝: Offshore≠Algo 0.070 0.020 0.017 0.038 0.063 0.045 0.017 0.033 0.028
𝑝: Offshore≠Crypto 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.024 0.019 0.050 0.045 0.028 0.052
𝑝: Algo≠ Crypto 0.697 0.385 0.215 0.210 0.322 0.217 0.103 0.170 0.129
Note: This
table reports selected coefficient estimates from Equation (1) representing the cumulative flow impulse response function for
US-based(𝛽1
0),offshoreasset-backed( 𝛽2
0),crypto-backed( 𝛽3
0),andalgorithmic( 𝛽4
0)stablecoins.Thespecificationismodifiedtoinclude
31 lags for the dependent and independents variables. Observations are weighted by pre-event market capitalization. All regressions
include coin fixed effects. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. T-statistics are in parentheses. Stars indicate statistical significance
at the 10% (*), 5% (**), and 1% (***) levels.
53